The Long Downturn and Its Political Results: A Reply to Critics
[em:VE9TU4JA]
LLM bundle copy: text only; source original retained unchanged.
Page markers give the printed page where detected and always give the source PDF page.

[p. 25 | PDF p. 1]
dylan riley & robert brenner

THE LONG DOWNTURN
AND ITS POLITICAL RESULTS
A Reply to Critics

‘S

even theses on American Politics’, a provisional and hastily
composed response to the 2022 mid-term elections, touched off,
somewhat to our surprise, an extensive debate, stimulating and
strongly argued, in nlr’s pages and beyond.1 We’re grateful to all
who engaged with the text, in many cases critically elaborating upon its
implications in ways that helped us to clarify our own ideas. Before diving into the substance of the debate, we should consider what provoked
the unexpected intensity of the response. In our view, this has much to
do with the broader political conjuncture. The historical matrix in which
‘Seven Theses’ appeared was defined by the continuing incapacity of
governments to revitalize the economy amid growing heartland discontent; the clear electoral advantage of the far-right forces over the radical
new lefts, as protest vehicles for this—maga over Sanders, Farage over
Corbyn, Le Pen over Mélenchon, the AfD over Die Linke; and rising geopolitical tensions, with the stand-off between the us and China and the
Russian invasion of Ukraine; within a year, the Middle East would be on
fire under a new round of Israeli expansionism.
Within this fraught situation—constituting a multi-front crisis for the
left, even before Trump’s second win—political discourse had become
centred on narrow electoralist questions. Our piece—perhaps precisely
because of its aphoristic, fragmentary character—brought these larger
strategic problems to the fore. Rather than look to the culture wars to
explain America’s polarizations, we argued that these expressed the
new left review 155 Sept Oct 2025



[p. 26 | PDF p. 2]
nlr 155

material interests of different working-class fractions within the zerosum conditions of a stagnant economy; this had now mutated into a
form of ‘political capitalism’, wherein low returns on productive investment were compensated by politically engineered upward redistribution
on a systemic scale.
Our critics addressed these propositions from multiple angles. Tim
Barker raised some acute questions about our analysis of secular
stagnation. Aaron Benanav set the long downturn in the context of
supply-chain globalization, the shift to services and financial-sector
‘over-accumulation’. Matthew Karp disputed our definition of class and
our characterization of the party coalitions, suggesting that we elided
the extent to which the liberal Democratic elite signified a self-satisfied
ruling class for many American workers. Alyssa Battistoni and Geoff
Mann took us to task for neglecting any substantive discussion of
Biden’s Green New Deal. Many critics took issue with our conception
of ‘political capitalism’: notably, for Lola Seaton, we didn’t differentiate its mode of upward redistribution from the normal operations of
the capitalist state, nor explain its relation to neoliberal capitalism, as
generally understood. Both Barker and Carmen Parmense—writing in
ss African Mercury—pointed out that Brenner had previously rejected
the idea of distinct ‘regimes of accumulation’. Seaton, Barker, Parmense
and others asked how political capitalism related to the highly charged
international situation.2
Dylan Riley and Robert Brenner, ‘Seven Theses on American Politics’, nlr 138,
Nov–Dec 2022. We would like to thank Suzi Weissman for her extensive comments
on many drafts of this article.
2
Tim Barker, ‘Some Questions about Political Capitalism’ and Aaron Benanav, ‘A
Dissipating Glut?’, both in nlr 140/141, Mar–June 2023; Matthew Karp, ‘Party and
Class in American Politics’, nlr 139, Jan–Feb 2023; Alyssa Battistoni and Geoff
Mann, ‘Climate Bidenomics’, nlr 143, Sept–Oct 2023; Lola Seaton, ‘Reflections on
“Political Capitalism”’, nlr 142, Jul–Aug 2023; Carmen Parmense ‘The Economics
of Ideological Turbulence’, ss African Mercury, no. 1, Fall–Winter 2023. On geopolitics, see also Grey Anderson, ‘Strategies of Denial’, Sidecar, 15 June 2023.
In addition, see John Ganz, ‘Notes on “Political Capitalism”’, Unpopular Front,
13 January 2023; J. W. Mason, ‘Yes, Socialists Should Support Industrial Policy
and a Green New Deal’, Jacobin, 6 April 2023. On class definitions, see Gabriel
Winant, ‘The Baby and the Bathwater: Class Analysis and Class Formation after
Deindustrialization’, Historical Materialism, vol. 32, no. 2, 2024, which chides us for
introducing ‘Weberian concepts of status groups’.
1



[p. 27 | PDF p. 3]
riley & brenner: Reply

‘What is the connection between the evolution of capitalism since the
1980s and the structure of politics that has emerged in the rich world,
particularly in the us, since the financial crisis of 2007–08?’ This was
the question we wanted to answer. In responding to the myriad issues
raised in the debate, we aim first to tackle the economic questions—the
problems of declining profit rates, low investment, sluggish growth—
and then to discuss the political issues of class and party alignment in
relation to capitalism’s changing parameters. Full replies to the questions
of class definition, environmental strategy and geopolitical competition
require a degree of theoretical elaboration that would exceed the bounds
of this essay; we hope to return to them on another occasion. Here, however, we need to start by acknowledging that many of the responses to
‘Seven Theses’ pointed out real weaknesses or omissions in our analysis;
in some cases, the confusion and misunderstandings that arose were a
result of our own lack of clarity. We begin, therefore, by attempting to
rectify this through an initial examination of secular stagnation, as a
feature of mature capitalism, expanding the historical frame to compare
the two ‘long downturns’ of the 1930s and the 1970s, with the aim of
illuminating their contrasted outcomes.

1. theories of capitalist stagnation
Our point of departure in ‘Seven Theses’ was the observation that the
Long Downturn that has gripped the world economy since the early
1970s has proved more persistent than many commentators expected.
As Benanav notes, however, there is now a widening consensus among
economic historians on the reality of stagnation. Robert Gordon has
documented the mediocre performance of American Total Factor
Productivity (tfp) since the 1970s, while Bradford DeLong highlights
the ‘significant drop’ in worker-productivity growth for the 1973–2010
period. Ruchir Sharma notes that ‘productivity growth has slowed
sharply since 1980’. In a similar vein Thomas Philippon argues that
the slowdown in tfp growth ‘started in 2000 and is now widespread
among rich countries’, adding that the Great Recession of 2008–09
‘has probably reinforced this negative trend but it has not created it’. In
The Crisis of Democratic Capitalism, the ft’s Martin Wolf avers: ‘Average
productivity growth in the 2010s (between 2010 and 2019) became dismal in all high-income countries. This is important and depressing.’



[p. 28 | PDF p. 4]
nlr 155

Meanwhile, the secular trend of declining investment in oecd countries
is, as Cédric Durand notes, ‘one of the least contested features of the
advanced-capitalist economies.’ Recent oecd data confirm the decline in
net business investment, with the corporate sector ‘saving’—or paying
out to shareholders—significantly more than it invested.3
Long-term gdp per capita growth rates bear this out. As Figure 1 shows,
average gdp per capita growth for the us, uk, Germany, France, Italy
and Japan from the mid-1940s to around 1970 was often well above four
per cent, after the lower levels of the 1890s to the 1930s. Following the
severe depression of the mid-70s, such rates were never reached again.
Since the early 2000s, growth rates have struggled to reach 2 per cent
and have often been closer to zero.
How should we explain these developments? The bleak aftermath
of the 2008 crisis brought a revival of the concept of ‘secular stagnation’, first advanced by Alvin Hansen to describe the crisis of the 1930s.
Hansen (1887–1975), a Harvard economist and influential policy advisor
under Roosevelt and Truman, was an early advocate of Keynes’s perspective in the us, whose initial research focused on the business cycle.
Summarizing the work of Cassel, Schumpeter, Spiethoff and others,
Hansen’s Business Cycle Theory suggested this dynamic was set off by a
sudden spurt of capital accumulation which brought about the overproduction of capital stock, dragging down the rate of profit and ultimately
issuing in the collapse of investment. These cycles of boom and bust
occurred for two reasons. First, fixed-capital investments were made in
conditions of uncertainty: the nature of future demand was ‘impossible to forecast accurately, especially in a competitive society where each
producer is unaware of the amount of fixed capital which his competitors are constructing.’4 This uncertainty was an inherent feature of an
economy in which private actors made the main investment decisions.
Robert Gordon, The Rise and Fall of American Growth: The us Standard of Living
since the Civil War, Princeton nj 2016, pp. 574–79; J. Bradford DeLong, Slouching
Towards Utopia, New York 2022, p. 10; Ruchir Sharma, What Went Wrong with
Capitalism, New York 2024, p. 13; Thomas Philippon, The Great Reversal: How
America Gave up on Free Markets, Cambridge ma 2019, p. 15; Martin Wolf, The
Crisis of Democratic Capitalism, New York 2023, p. 99; Cédric Durand, ‘Scouting
Capital’s Frontiers’, nlr 13, Jul–Aug 2022, p. 38; oecd, Compendium of Productivity
Indicators 2025, Paris 2025, discussed in Sam Fleming, ‘Weak Business Investment
Threatens Global Growth, Warns oecd’, Financial Times, 5 August 2025.
4
Alvin Hansen, Business-Cycle Theory: Its Development and Present Status, New York
1927, pp. 100–01.
3



[p. 29 | PDF p. 5]
Figure 1: Average gdp Per Capita Growth, Selected Countries
FIGURE ONE: AVERAGE GDP PER CAPITA GROWTH FIVE YEAR INTERVALS (GERMANY, US, JAPAN,

%
7
6

6

5

5

3
2

4

3

2

1

2

4

3

3

2

1

2

1

0

2

2

2

2

2

1

0

0

-1

1

1

2016–2020

4

2011–2015

4

0

-1

2006–2010

2001–2005

1996–2000

1991–1995

1986–1990

1981–1985

1976–1980

1971–1975

1966–1970

1961–1965

1956–1960

1951–1955

1946–1950

1931–1935

1926–1930

1921–1925

1916–1920

1911–1915

1901–1905

1896–1900

1891–1895

-2

Notes: Germany, us, Japan, Italy, uk. Source: Maddison Project Database 2020.

Second, investments were by their very nature ‘fixed’ at a certain point in
time, introducing another source of uncertainty: when money was converted into physical means of production, it took an extended period of
time before it began to deliver returns, but it was hard to predict all the
changes that could occur while the investor was waiting to realise them.5
Capitalist investment was thus a leap in the dark. It contained no inherent
tendency for supply and demand to meet. Faute de mieux, investors were
obliged to take current ‘high prices and profits’ as indicators of future
demand, but these were bad indicators, since they only provided information about the present. These false signals could lead to continued
investment even as the market became saturated. Accordingly, Hansen
concluded, overproduction of the means of production was the norm.
Albert Aftalion, La réalité des surproductions générales: essai d’une théorie des crises
générales et périodiques, Paris 1909, p. 11, is perhaps the clearest exposition of this
idea and had a strong influence on Hansen.
5



[p. 30 | PDF p. 6]
nlr 155

With the onset of the Great Depression, Hansen moved beyond his
analysis of cyclical fluctuations to an incipient account of long waves of
capitalist development. Published in 1938, Full Recovery or Stagnation?
drew on Keynes’s emphasis on the ‘expected rate of profit’ as the key
driver of investment decisions, as well as his insistence on the inherent
unknowability of their future consequences. Hansen held that interest
rates—the cost of funds—were a relatively minor factor in the decision
to invest, arguing that ‘other considerations, such as the prospective
volume of business, economies resulting from the introduction of new
machinery, anticipations with respect to the probable success of new
ventures, and the like, are overwhelmingly more significant’.6 As to the
amount of investment, his analysis of the short-lived 1935–37 recovery
demonstrated that this was limited since it had primarily been driven
by an increase in consumption spending, caused by rising demand for
durable consumer goods and ‘income-stimulating expenditures of the
federal government’. But this added demand was unable to create a
self-sustaining boom, mainly because increased consumption could be
met relatively easily through the employment of already existing capital equipment, which would at most require replacement and repair,
but not a wave of new investment. Only a recovery that was investment-led, featuring ‘bold projects looking far into the future’ and not
‘narrowly geared to the current rate of consumer demand’, could bring
about sustained growth.7
Hansen’s pivotal 1939 essay, ‘Economic Progress and Declining Population
Growth’, called for economists to ‘turn away in large measure from the everpresent and all-absorbing problem of cyclical fluctuations’ to probe ‘the
even more fundamental issue of structural change’, including how long
waves shape cyclical fluctuations. As Hansen defined the conjuncture:
The swift stream of events in the last quarter century offers overwhelming
testimony in support of the thesis that the economic order of the Western
world is undergoing in this generation a structural change no less basic
and profound in character than that transformation of economic life and
institutions which we are wont to designate loosely by the phrase ‘the

Alvin Hansen, Full Recovery or Stagnation?, New York 1938, p. 311. For a good
account of Hansen’s focus on investment see Roger Backhouse and Mauro
Boianovsky, ‘Secular Stagnation: The History of a Macroeconomic Heresy’,
European Journal of the History of Economic Thought, vol. 23, no. 6, 2016, p. 952.
7
Hansen, Full Recovery or Stagnation?, pp. 277, 279.
6



[p. 31 | PDF p. 7]
riley & brenner: Reply

Industrial Revolution’. We are passing, so to speak, over a divide which
separates the great era of growth and expansion of the 19th century from
an era which no man, unwilling to embark on pure conjecture, can yet characterize with clarity or precision. We are moving swiftly out of the order in
which those of our generation were brought up, into no one knows what.8

Hansen’s theory of ‘secular stagnation’ was an attempt to capture the
fundamental traits of the new epoch. Its starting point was his longheld view that investment was the key driver of economic growth. Only
investment could soak up the difference between mere consumption
spending to raise demand and the ‘level of income which could be
achieved were all the factors employed’. The problem of employing all
factors, above all labour, had not been an issue in the 19th century, when
it could be assumed that any lags would be transitory as the capitalist
economy expanded; it became pressing only in the 20th century, once it
was fully mature. As he wrote:
Not until the problem of full employment of our productive resources from
the long run secular standpoint was upon us were we compelled to give
serious consideration to those factors and forces in our economy which
tend to make business recoveries weak and anaemic, and which tend to
prolong and deepen the course of depressions. This is the essence of secular stagnation—sick recoveries which die in their infancy and depressions
which feed on themselves and leave a hard, seemingly immovable core of
unemployment.9

Once secular stagnation came to be the historical norm, external policy would be required to counter a difficulty internal to the economy’s
functioning. It cannot be over-stressed what an important revision this
constituted to neoclassical models, which tended to interpret demand
as the main stimulus to increased investment. For Hansen, as we have
seen, this was false because capitalist growth was characterized not so
much by production to meet existing demand as by production in anticipation of future profits.10 This, of course, was close to Marx’s position
that capitalist production is oriented to capital accumulation, not to the
satisfaction of existing needs. Accordingly, the availability of investment
Hansen, ‘Economic Progress and Declining Population Growth’, American
Economic Review, vol. 29, no. 1, March 1939, pp. 1, 5, 4.
9
Hansen, ‘Economic Progress’, p. 4.
10
Hansen, Full Recovery or Stagnation?, p. 312.
8



[p. 32 | PDF p. 8]
nlr 155

outlets where future profits could be made was the ultimate determinant
of an economy’s dynamism or stagnation, over the long run.
However, despite this acute insight, Hansen’s answer to the question
of where new investment opportunities could be found was limited to
an ad-hoc list of exogenous factors, inexplicable in terms of the theory
itself. The first was population growth, which would ‘necessarily play
an important role’ in determining ‘the composition of the flow of final
goods’, since a younger population would demand new housing, calling
for large capital outlays, whereas an aging population would demand
personal services, which were less capital intensive. Noting a sharp slowdown in 1930s population growth, he argued that this risked ‘serious
structural maladjustments’ which could only be mitigated by ‘economic
policies, appropriate to the changed situation’.11
The second source of investment opportunities had been America’s
open frontier, which Hansen believed had been responsible for a ‘very
considerable’ proportion of new capital formation. But the frontier was
now closing and the new outlets it had provided were disappearing, not
only in the us but in the world at large. This left the third source of
investment opportunities: science and technology. But here there were
further problems. Based on his investigation of emerging new industries, Hansen argued that technological progress tended to come not
smoothly and evenly but ‘by gigantic leaps and bounds’. It was ‘discontinuous, lumpy and jerky’. This ‘lumpy’ character of new technological
investment created an obstacle to further rounds of growth, because it
tended to produce economic actors with an interest in opposing further
technological advance. Once firms had laid down plant and equipment
embodying a certain level of technology, it made sense for them to continue to use it, even if newer and more productive plant and equipment
had become available—at least until the economies of the new techniques could cover the undepreciated value of the old machinery. The
economic rationality of sticking with plant that had already been paid
for, even if it had ceased to embody the most cost-effective technology,
could constitute a major practical barrier to economic progress.12
Hansen, ‘Economic Progress’, pp. 3, 7, 2.
Hansen, ‘Economic Progress’, pp. 9–12. For further development of this argument
see Robert Brenner, The Economics of Global Turbulence: The Advanced Capitalist
Economies from Long Boom to Long Downturn, 1945–2005, London and New York
2006, pp. xx, 34; and Oskar Lange, ‘On the Economic Theory of Socialism: Part
Two’, Review of Economic Studies, vol. 4, no. 2, February 1937, pp. 128–9.
11

12



[p. 33 | PDF p. 9]
riley & brenner: Reply

Hansen concluded that the us economy in the 1930s suffered from the
vanishing of investment opportunities, creating a large gap between
expenditures on consumption and the level of income that could be
achieved at full employment. This was ‘secular stagnation’, and its most
obvious manifestation was a large pool of savings being withheld from
investment, even in the context of very low interest rates. The best possibility for breaking out of this configuration was being choked off by
powerful monopolists, intent on protecting the value of their already
existing investments.

From Great Depression to Great Recession
The Long Boom of the post-war decades appeared to rule Hansen’s theory
of secular stagnation out of court. But it came back into its own once the
expansion was exhausted. It was perhaps no accident that it was Lawrence
Summers, whose parents and uncles, leading economists themselves,
had been colleagues, students and contemporaries of Hansen, who
took up the challenge, having presided over the ‘sickly recovery’ from
2008 as Obama’s chief economic adviser. How to explain that surprisingly weak outcome, despite years of near-zero interest rates and over
$5 trillion’s worth of bailed-out assets on central banks’ balance sheets?
For Summers, the key to understanding the situation lay in ‘the concept
of secular stagnation put forward by Alvin Hansen’, which he characterized in the same terms: low investment coexisting with a large pool of
untapped savings, despite low interest rates.13 But though his aim was
to provide an updated version of stagnation, Summers did not offer any
clearer explanation than Hansen had of why this should be happening.
Some of his claims were true by definition, such as that secular stagnation was caused by ‘an imbalance resulting from an increasing propensity
to save and a decreasing propensity to invest’ or that ‘the underlying
reason for secular stagnation is the excess of savings over investment’.
Summers at times supplemented such statements with ad-hoc causal
propositions, attributing reduced investment to ‘slower growth in the
labour force, the availability of cheaper capital goods and tighter credit’.14
Lawrence Summers, ‘The Age of Secular Stagnation’, Foreign Affairs, vol. 95, no. 2,
2016, p. 2. See also Lawrence Summers, ‘Secular Stagnation and Monetary Policy’,
Federal Reserve Bank of Saint Louis Review, vol. 98, no. 2, 2016, pp. 96–7; Lukasz
Rachel and Lawrence Summers, ‘On Secular Stagnation in the Industrialized
World’, Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, vol. 50, no. 1, 2019, p. 5.
14
Summers, ‘The Age of Secular Stagnation’.
13



[p. 34 | PDF p. 10]
nlr 155

Like Hansen, he treated the first of these, population growth, as a process completely external to capitalism, an unmoved mover. The second,
cheaper or more productive plant and equipment, seemed to go against
Hansen, as Summers presented technological progress as a cause of
stagnation rather than a solution to it.15 The third cause, tighter credit,
appears to contradict the central thrust of his description of secular stagnation as excessive savings and low interest rates: wouldn’t the latter
alleviate the former?
When it came to policy, however, Summers’s argument cut clearly against
Hansen’s diagnosis. Secular stagnation, he told Foreign Affairs readers,
was primarily a problem of insufficient demand, ‘not that difficult’ to
rectify through a kind of class compromise supporting both ‘business
confidence’ and ‘increased labour compensation’. In any case, this would
be much easier than ‘raising the capacity to produce’, so was ‘the crucial
thing’ for policymakers, who might otherwise worry that there could
be ‘a profound or inherent flaw in capitalism’.16 For Hansen, of course,
‘raising the capacity to produce’ was the key to breaking out of secular
stagnation. A consumption-led recovery of the sort that Summers was
advocating might temporarily arouse the economy from stagnation but
could never generate self-sustaining growth. Since investment was oriented to the future, not the present, it was the prospective rate of return,
not existing consumer demand, that was the key driver of growth.
Consequently, a society which saves could escape ‘a progressive fall in
income and employment only through the continuous development of
new investment outlets, such as are created by technological progress.’17
A stimulus to demand would not solve the underlying problem.

2. an endogenous explanation
In both Hansen’s and Summers’s accounts, the theory of secular stagnation ultimately remained descriptive rather than explanatory—as can
be seen by the fact that their details contradict one another. The upshot
Summers, ‘Secular Stagnation and Monetary Policy’, p. 102. Hansen had intuited
that this might be a possibility, writing that, ‘it is a grave question whether inventions and innovations are not likely in the future to be less capital-using than in the
19th century’: Full Recovery or Stagnation?, p. 315.
16
Summers, ‘The Age of Secular Stagnation’.
17
Hansen, Full Recovery or Stagnation?, p. 296.
15



[p. 35 | PDF p. 11]
riley & brenner: Reply

seems to be that, for unspecified reasons, during certain periods, the
world economy is afflicted with a problem of excess savings and sluggish growth. This might have something to do with the using up of land
or other natural resources, declining population growth or stagnating—
or, alternatively, accelerating—technological development. It might also
have to do with the interest rate. But, in the end, why the syndrome of
low investment and sagging economic growth occurs even in the context
of very low interest rates remains obscure.
This raises the crucial question of how to interpret these two rounds
of secular stagnation, in the 1930s and the current period, in a consistent way. Our point of departure is that capitalism is a system of
property relations distinguished by historically unprecedented ongoing
growth thanks to the competitive constraint on individual producers
to maximize the ratio of prices to costs built into those very property
relations. Under this regime, owners of the means of production are
market-constrained in a double way. First, capitalists’ very reproduction
as owners, their continuing proprietorship and control of the means of
production, depends upon their success in carrying out an initial market
transaction: the purchase of their plant and equipment, as well as other
inputs, at the lowest possible price—and all the more so when they have
purchased them on credit. Second, capitalists’ continuation as owners
depends on the sale of their output on competitive markets; only after
they have successfully sold their products do capitalists realize surplus
value in the form of profit.
This double set of constraints—market dependence in accessing
inputs and market dependence in selling produced goods—means that
capitalist enterprises have no choice but to maximize their price-cost
ratios to stay in business, and this generates a system-wide tendency
to introduce new and better machinery and more productive ways to
organize the labour process. The upshot is a tendency to untrammelled
investment and relentless technological advance that is unlike any previous mode of production. Technological advance in this context is hardly
an exogenous factor that can be either present or absent, as one might
infer from Hansen and Summers. On the contrary, it is intrinsic to
capitalist development.
But if technological development is inherent to capitalism, why should
secular stagnation ever occur? Here, the unplanned, anarchic character



[p. 36 | PDF p. 12]
nlr 155

of capitalist investment must be taken into account. Capitalists must
produce for the market and therefore cannot orient directly to maximizing utility. On the contrary, their first priority must be to maximize
exchange value, in the form of profits—and to do so in a context of
fundamental uncertainty, since each one acts as an individual owner.
Thus, although capitalists are under an imperative to introduce new
machinery and methods of production to lower their costs, they make
these investments in an uncoordinated way. It is in this context that
Hansen’s insights about the speculative character of investment take on
their full meaning.
This pattern of uneven investment leads to a situation where some
producers are using newer, more efficient machinery and methods of
production, while others are still using the older ones. Because the new
producers’ costs are lower, they can sell their output at a cheaper price
than the old producers, while still earning the average rate of profit.
However, this now imposes the new price on all the producers in the
line. Given their effectively higher costs, the older producers now earn
a lower rate of profit and, indeed, the rate of profit sags for all producers in the line. In this situation, one might expect that the higher-cost
producers would either adopt the new technology to lower their costs, or
shift out of the line altogether. But, as Hansen pointed out, they cannot
profitably exit because their investments are ‘sunk’, tied up in specific
physically existing masses of fixed capital that are useless unless they
are employed in the production of the things they were designed to
produce. For this reason, it is rational for higher-cost producers to continue using their older fixed capital, so long as they can make at least
the average rate of profit on their circulating capital. This process drags
down profitability in the entire line and reduces the dynamism of the
economy overall.18
Much of this is compatible with the earlier account of secular-stagnation
theory, including Hansen’s. Ours differs primarily in that its explanation
Brenner, The Economics of Global Turbulence, pp. 28–9. This point was anticipated by Oskar Lange, who writes that ‘In a competitive régime with a parametric
function of prices and with free entry of new firms into each industry, entrepreneurs and investors have to submit to the losses and devaluation of old investments
resulting from innovations, for there is no possibility of counteracting it’: ‘On the
Economic Theory of Socialism: Part Two’, pp. 128–9. James Crotty attributes a
similar view to Keynes in Keynes Against Capitalism: His Economic Case for Liberal
Socialism, New York 2019, p. 90.
18



[p. 37 | PDF p. 13]
riley & brenner: Reply

does not rely on factors supposedly exogenous to capitalist social relations to explain patterns of long-term growth and stagnation. For us, the
very thing that makes capitalism dynamic—that is, the tendency of capitalists to invest in new equipment and production methods to improve
productivity—also leads to secular stagnation. But while this offers a
way to explain the onset of secular stagnation in general, it raises the
further questions of why the crisis of the 1930s issued, after 1942, into
one of the most sustained periods of growth in world history; why the
post-war Long Boom eventually gave way to slowdown; why the Long
Downturn remains unresolved even today.
Given the model of capitalism that is our point of departure, it will
come as no surprise that, for us, the fundamental reason for secular
stagnation is the failure of the rate of profit to recover. Figure 2 presents
evidence on the us manufacturing net rate of profit, exclusive of inventories.19 It shows that the profit rate was at its highest point in the 1950s,

Figure 2: Net Profit Rate, 1948–2021
%
0.35
0.30
0.25
0.20
0.15
0.10
0.05

1950

1960

1970

1980

1990

2000

2010

2020

Source: bea gdp by Industry; bea Fixed Assets Table 4.1.

Inventories must be excluded from the manufacturing profit rate because otherwise gains accruing from their appreciation would be counted as profit, when in
fact they should be seen as a form of asset-price inflation.
19



[p. 38 | PDF p. 14]
nlr 155

returning to a slightly lower peak in the 1960s before dropping sharply
in the 1970s, bottoming out in the 1980s and early 90s, making a partial
recovery from the late 90s, before stagnating after 2008 and dropping
again during the Covid pandemic. In other words, the manufacturing
rate of profit has remained stubbornly low since the crisis of the 1970s,
despite the cheaper labour costs obtained through globalization. How
to explain this?
To answer the question, it may be helpful to return to the Great
Depression. The decade of the 1930s was not an era of total stagnation. As Robert Gordon has shown, a group of highly productive new
industries began to emerge in the late 1920s.20 But these new enterprises could not play a leading role in the economy until the Depression
had fatally weakened some of the older firms. The evidence suggests,
however, that the breakout from the first round of secular stagnation
required something more than developments internal to the economy.
After all, the 1935–37 recovery had petered out by 1938.21 Rather, it was
the enormous contingency of the Second World War—associated both
with an unprecedented physical destruction of fixed capital stock and a
much more active role for the state in directly promoting massive investments in war-time production—that re-started us growth and laid the
foundations for the post-war boom, foreseen by virtually no one, together
with the emergence of an effectively global capitalism after 1945. As a
measure of the American state’s central role in restarting the economy:
the number of machine tools in the us doubled between 1940–45, but
almost all the new ones were funded by the government rather than by
private firms.22 As Crotty puts the general point:
We cannot know how long stagnation might have lasted had there not been
a world war. It took a huge increase in us military spending, a governmentplanned war economy and a sharp decline in the available domestic labour
force during World War ii to finally achieve low unemployment.23
See the discussion of 1930s innovations in Gordon, The Rise and Fall of American
Growth, pp. 555–62. For a fascinating examination of technological progress in the
years 1929–41, see Alexander Field, ‘The Most Technologically Progressive Decade
of the Century’, American Economic Review, vol. 93, no. 4, September 2003.
21
See also DeLong, Slouching Towards Utopia, pp. 230–2, for a sceptical view of the
fundamental economic impact of the New Deal. For DeLong neither the first nor
the second New Deal cured the Great Depression.
22
Gordon, The Rise and Fall of American Growth, p. 553.
23
Crotty, Keynes Against Capitalism, p. 16. Gordon’s analysis is similar. He writes that
20



[p. 39 | PDF p. 15]
riley & brenner: Reply

In the absence of this shock, Hansen’s prediction of an entropic, monopolistic and politically buttressed capitalist system—what we are terming political
capitalism—could well have been vindicated. In Hansen’s formulation:
Progress is slowed down, and outlets for new capital formation, available
under a more ruthless competitive society, are cut off. Capital losses which
could not be avoided under rigorous price competition can be and are
avoided under an economic system more and more closely integrated by
intercorporate association and imperfect competition. If we are to save the
one remaining outlet for private capital formation, deliberate action of a far
bolder character than hitherto envisaged must be undertaken in order to
make the price system and free enterprise sufficiently responsible to permit
at least that measure of capital formation to which the rate of technological
progress had accustomed us in the past.24

There was, in short, no intrinsic mechanism leading to a breakout from
secular stagnation.

The new configuration
What about the current situation? Why—beneath the financial froth—
has stagnation been so persistent, recovery so weak? One obvious
difference with the 1930s is the absence of such cataclysmic forcing
events as the Great Depression—when us gdp contracted by nearly
25 per cent—and the Second World War. Despite the multiple us wars
against weaker states on the periphery, since the onset of the downturn
in the 1970s there have been no geopolitical conflicts on a scale necessary to force a partial socialization of investment or a major clear-out
of obsolescent means of production. Much as today’s political leaders
would like to re-ignite rapid capital accumulation, unlike Hoover and
Mellon they shrink from imposing a depression severe enough to ‘purge’
the system—inflicting bankruptcy on owners of zombie firms and mass
unemployment on the population. Chronic excess capacity thus persists in part because it has proved politically impossible to get rid of the
fixed-capital backlog. As Figure 3 shows, the average utilization of us
manufacturing capacity has fallen, decade by decade, from 85 per cent
in the 1960s to 78 per cent in the 1980s and then, after a brief uptick in
‘World War ii saved the us economy from secular stagnation, and a hypothetical scenario of economic growth after 1939 that does not include the war looks dismal at
best’: The Rise and Fall of American Growth, p. 565.
24
Hansen, ‘Economic Progress’, p. 12.



[p. 40 | PDF p. 16]
nlr 155

Figure 3: Capacity Utilization in Manufacturing
%
86

82

78

74

70
1950

1960

1970

1980

1990

2000

2010

Source: Federal Reserve Economic Data, Federal Reserve Bank of St Louis

the 1990s, down to 75 per cent in the 2000s and 2010s. In other words,
25 per cent of us plant and equipment is simply stagnating.
Unable to force the economy to grow faster, political leaders have consciously or unconsciously adapted to stagnation, without ever quite
admitting it. They have lost confidence in traditional Keynesian stimulus policy but cannot decisively break from it, as they have no coherent
replacement for it. One reason for re-channelling income upwards—
through bailouts, tax cuts, deregulation, quantitative easing—was the
hope that this would restart growth. In this, political leaders and capitalists have quite openly allied in promoting new practices to appropriate
the surplus product. We have termed the resulting combination, still
taking shape, ‘political capitalism’.
How did this configuration emerge? Low interest rates began to reveal
their limits as a policy for stimulating the economy by the mid-1970s.
Paul Volcker, whose career as Federal Reserve chair began under Carter
and continued into the Reagan administration, charted a new course by
imposing high interest rates in an effort to kill inflationary expectations as
a prelude to restarting growth. With bipartisan backing, the programme



[p. 41 | PDF p. 17]
riley & brenner: Reply

grew into an all-out assault on organized labour, far-reaching deregulation of the financial sector and tax cuts for the wealthy.25 Yet despite
the rhetoric of market efficiency, the ‘neoliberal turn’ did not so much
represent the unleashing of the market as the intensification of capital’s
dependence on the state. Under Reagan, large budget deficits were for
the first time intentionally incurred to finance the government’s operations.26 Federal deficits averaged just one per cent of gdp from 1950–70,
as taxes rose to cover government expenditures.27 But that formula was
broken from the 1980s on, as deficits became a permanent feature of the
us economy—and financing them a major source of profits. As DeLong
puts it:
After the us economy reattained the neighbourhood of full employment in
the mid-1980s, the Reagan deficits diverted about four per cent of national
income from investment into consumption spending: instead of flowing
out of savers’ pockets through banks to companies that would buy and
install machines, finance flowed out of savers’ pockets through banks into
government, where it funded the tax cuts for the rich, so the rich could then
spend their windfalls on luxury consumption.28

Financing state expenditures through borrowing was by no means
restricted to the us. Across the rich world, the rejection of Keynesianism
in principle combined with ever-greater deficit spending in practice,
giving rise to what Wolfgang Streeck has termed ‘debt states’, increasingly covering their expenditures through recourse to credit markets. As
Streeck shows, state debt has proved to be a perfect short-term solution
for meeting the demands of capital to lower tax rates and simultaneously
to create new opportunities for making money. The rich are not only
allowed to keep their wealth but also offered a profitable place to re-invest
it. This was politically driven upward redistribution with a vengeance.29
During the 1990s, this regime mutated as first Bush and then Clinton
moved to deregulate the financial sector and stoke private borrowing,
at historically low interest rates—an expression of the persistent weakness of aggregate demand that was making for the continuation of the
For a brisk account see DeLong, Slouching Towards Utopia, pp. 440–43.
Sharma, What Went Wrong with Capitalism, p. 54.
27
DeLong, Slouching Towards Utopia, p. 404.
28
DeLong, Slouching Towards Utopia, pp. 444–45.
29
Wolfgang Streeck, Buying Time: The Delayed Crisis of Democratic Capitalism,
London and New York 2017 [2014], second edition, pp. 71, 36, 77.
25

26



[p. 42 | PDF p. 18]
nlr 155

long downturn. The Fed’s low borrowing costs also opened the way for
financiers to earn big profits from the difference in rates at which they
borrowed and those at which they lent. In the relative absence of profitable opportunities to invest in the real economy, this took on great
importance. The cost of borrowing steadily declined until it flatlined
completely from 2009–16, ticking up—though still very low in relation
to the rate of inflation—in 2022 (Figure 4). The capitalism of the current
period has been constructed around these low interest rates, a reflection
once again of secular stagnation.
Investors were able to exploit the gap between borrowing and lending
costs to fuel historic stock market and asset-price bubbles—the ‘asset
price Keynesianism’ that has been such a defining feature of the current era.30 This opened the way for the financial-market turbulence of
the 21st century, manifested in the dot-com bubble, the housing bubble,
the credit-market bubble—or ‘bubblenomics’. These phenomena have

Figure 4: Cost of Borrowing, 1954–2023
%
25
20
15
10
5
0
1960

1970

1980

1990

2000

2010

2020

Source: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System via fred. Notes: interest rates
and price indices, effective federal funds rate; quarterly, not seasonally adjusted.

30

Brenner, The Economics of Global Turbulence, p. 293.



[p. 43 | PDF p. 19]
riley & brenner: Reply

been associated with a monumental concentration of wealth at the very
top of the hierarchy, rendered all the more extreme by tight real-estate
markets in global cities like New York and London.31 The basic mechanism was simple. Support for asset prices through the availability of easy
money benefited people who already owned them, and had toxic effects
on house prices, but had little effect on the real economy.32 Low interest
rates fuelled speculation, leading to a series of financial crises—1998,
2000, 2008. After each crash, speculators were bailed out at taxpayer
expense, a process that eroded legitimacy and bred rising discontent.
The bailouts following the 2008 crisis served to deepen the slowdown.
As the debt-fuelled housing bubble deflated, it further destabilized the
financial sector; the response by nearly every major capitalist state was
quantitative easing—stepped-up buying by central banks of government
bonds held by private banks. More simply put, qe involved the authorities—the Treasury–Fed complex, in the case of the us—injecting cash
into the banks by buying up their risky assets, as well as loan guarantees and asset swaps. With struggling mortgage holders left under water,
these steps were widely perceived as unfair, and—from the 2009 rise
of the Tea Party onwards—they would have profound political consequences, as well as making the value of firms increasingly dependent on
state support, implicit or explicit.33
The ballooning financial sector itself now accounts for something like a
quarter of us corporate profits.34 Its position has been transformed since
the post-war period, when it more or less fulfilled the classic function
For an overview of the effects of qe see Will Dunn, ‘The qe Theory of Everything’,
New Statesman, 28 February 2024. Dunn sums up the bottom line: ‘Not only did qe
fail to stimulate growth, but it created inequality of a kind not seen for generations,
a polarized politics—and another huge asset bubble’, p. 21. The literature on assetprice inflation is of course immense. For a very good account focused on physical
assets see Brett Christophers, Our Lives in Their Portfolios: Why Asset Managers Own
the World, London and New York 2024.
32
Sharma, What Went Wrong with Capitalism, pp. 214–15, where Sharma writes, ‘the
more governments intervene to prevent the busts and keep asset prices rising all
the time, the more they widen wealth inequality and generational inequality as well.’
33
DeLong, Slouching Towards Utopia, pp. 504–6; Wolf, The Crisis of Democratic
Capitalism, pp. 109–13; Durand, Fictitious Capital: How Finance Is Appropriating Our
Future, London and New York 2017, pp. 98–9.
34
Wolf, Crisis of Democratic Capitalism, p. 151. Wolf, the ft’s chief economics commentator, continues: ‘The financial sector wastes both human and real resources.
It is in large part a rent extraction machine’: p. 153.
31



[p. 44 | PDF p. 20]
nlr 155

of transferring money from savers to investors.35 Increasingly since the
1990s it has expanded into household lending, leading to swelling debt.
What has emerged is a form of ‘privatized Keynesianism’ that operates
to support consumer demand in a context of stagnating incomes. As
Durand argues, debt service paid by households constitutes a ‘secondary
form of exploitation’, superimposed on the normal transfer of surplus
through the wage-labour relationship, at a cost of around 5–8 per cent
of their income.36 None of this activity has revived investment. On the
contrary: the growth of finance since the 1980s has been associated
with slowing capital accumulation and declining productivity growth—
economic sluggishness in general. In the us, uk, Germany, Italy and
Japan, fixed capital formation as a percentage of gdp declined steadily
from 1990 (Figure 5).

Figure 5: Average Gross Fixed Capital Formation as a Percentage of gdp
%
30
25
20
15
10
5

0

1972

1980

1988

1996

2004

2012

2020

Source: World Development Indicators, World Bank

Michael McCarthy, The Master’s Tools: How Finance Wrecked Democracy (And a
Radical Plan to Rebuild It), London and New York 2025, pp. 56–7.
36
Durand, Fictitious Capital, pp. 85–6. See also Brenner, The Economics of Global
35



[p. 45 | PDF p. 21]
riley & brenner: Reply

The government response to the crisis of 2008 revealed the outlines
of a new regime, still to come fully into view, in which investment was
predicated on explicit backing from governments, making possible derisking—and, more generally, ‘political capitalism’. Because it emerged
for the most part in response to weakening profitability, capital accumulation and growth, political capitalism possessed defining characteristics
that were, roughly speaking, the opposite of those of capitalism in the
post-war age. As returns on investment fell and growth declined, the
incentive to accumulate capital weakened and capitalists found it made
increasing sense to shift away from expansionary strategies and towards
redistributive ones, including state-guaranteed financial speculation.
The virtuous circle of the long boom was thus replaced by the vicious
circle of the long downturn: the growth slowdown rendered investment
in fixed capital decreasingly attractive and encouraged further redistribution, which depressed growth even more—a generalized loss of
dynamism that was exacerbated by the emerging structures of political
capitalism itself.

3. questioning the long downturn
We hope this clarifies the larger historical framework within which
the claims of ‘Seven Theses’ were sketched. We turn now to the main
political-economic questions raised by our critics, probing and apposite as they are. First, profitability. Tim Barker raises three interrelated
doubts about our argument.37 (i) Does it make sense to understand the
rate of profit, as we do, to be the main determinant of investment decisions? (ii) Does manufacturing profitability deserve to be given such a
central role, in view of the fact that the sector today makes up a relatively
small percentage of the economy as a whole? (iii) Has the average rate
of profit for the epoch since 1973 actually fallen, as we contend, by comparison to that of the post-war decades? We’ll take each of these in turn.
Turbulence, p. 293. As Brenner puts it: ‘In traditional Keynesian policy, demand is
“subsidized” by means of the federal government’s incurring of rising public deficits so as to spend more than it takes in taxes. By contrast, in Greenspan’s version,
demand is increased by means of corporations and wealthy households taking on
rising private deficits so as to spend more than they make, encouraged to do so by
the increased paper wealth that they effortlessly accrue by virtue of the appreciation
of the value of their stocks, or other assets.’
37
Barker, ‘Some Questions’.



[p. 46 | PDF p. 22]
nlr 155

(i) How does the profit rate shape investment? Barker notes that ‘Seven
Theses’ sees this happening through two main channels. First, retained
profits constitute the financial basis for investment. On this account,
what matters is the financial firepower available to firms, defined as the
ratio of the ‘mass of profits to the cost of desired investments’—i.e., the
total amount of money needed to acquire a specific investment, encompassing the initial purchase price and any associated fees or expenses. If
profits are to be interpreted as a financial constraint, this ratio—rather
than the profit rate defined as the realized rate of return on past investments—should be the primary determinant of investment decisions.
Barker rejects the notion that today’s profit levels, as we define them, are
a financial constraint on investment. Given ‘the widespread tendency
of corporations to use their money for dividends, stock buybacks and
executive compensation’, it seems plain that firms could just as easily
use this money to invest. The other channel through which the rate of
profit might constrain investment is as an indicator of future prospects
for profitability and for the economy more generally. Barker rejects this
too, arguing that firms’ decisions will primarily be based on the ratio of
returns ‘to the cost of the new investment’, which is not obviously related
to the general manufacturing profit rate as we have defined it. He challenges us to produce empirical evidence of ‘a firm making investments
based on the economy-wide ratio of profits to capital stock’.
It is indeed our view, as Barker says, that there are two main channels
through which a low profit rate holds down investment—by making for
smaller surpluses to invest and by making investment less attractive.
Contrary to what Barker says, there is plentiful evidence that low profitability has been a constraint on investment. Although there is a massive
overhang of excess savings in the economy as a whole, there is at the
same time a crisis of indebtedness among small and medium-sized
firms which is limiting the overall capacity of the economy to accumulate capital. ‘Zombie firms’, defined by Deutsche Bank as those unable to
meet the interest payments on their debt for three years running, constituted 20 per cent of public companies in the United States by 2020, and
around 25 per cent in the uk, Germany and France.38 Unsurprisingly,
these firms tend to invest less and drag down productivity in their sector. In general terms, small and medium-sized businesses in particular
Sharma, What Went Wrong with Capitalism, pp. 171, 233–34; McCarthy, The
Master’s Tools, p. 79.
38



[p. 47 | PDF p. 23]
riley & brenner: Reply

still remain cash-starved and a growing percentage of firms across the
capitalist world are unprofitable, swimming in debt and retrenching on
investment, despite the overall level of surplus available to the capitalist
class as a whole. Thus, Barker’s argument that low profits do not constitute
a financial constraint on investment is at the very least over-pitched.
On the rate of profit as an indicator for capitalist investment, Barker
rightly says that capitalists’ fundamental concern is what return they will
get on this specific investment in the future. But how do they figure out
what that will be? Our claim is that the realized profit rate is the central
signal they rely upon. Barker argues that this number is problematic
because it refers to the return on investments made in the past, when
what one wants to know is what that will be in the future. This is a good
point, in the abstract; but the problem is that there is no better available predictor of future profits than realized profits, as Hansen already
saw. Our contention, therefore, following many others, is that, despite
its flaws, the best guide to what the rate of return will be in the future is
what it has been in the past.39
It is no accident, then, that the rate of P/K—realized profits compared to
capital advanced—is the standard reference point, both for those wishing to analyse the health of the economy and capitalist investors seeking
to make money from it. This is why the profit rate, rather than the mass
of profits, is the crucial issue. The fact that investors are sitting on big
piles of cash is no indication that they will invest these surpluses in new
plant, equipment, tools and labour. They will only invest in new means
of production if they can expect a higher rate of return here than from
other options, such as assets, stocks or government debt. What determines where, how and when to invest realized profits is the rate of profit
that can be expected compared to the alternatives.
(ii) Why focus on the manufacturing rate of profit when, as Barker points
out, the manufacturing sector currently accounts for only 11 per cent of
value added in the us economy? It is true that there is no conceptual
reason to treat manufacturing as more ‘real’ than any other sector of
Hansen, in Business-Cycle Theory, pp. 109–10, grasped this point well, observing that investors take the realized rate of profit as their main indicator for future
demand. As Crotty points out, this was also central to Keynes’s understanding:
Keynes Against Capitalism, pp. 166, 24.
39



[p. 48 | PDF p. 24]
nlr 155

the economy. Over the long term, the leading sectors of capitalism have
shifted from agriculture to manufacturing to some combination of services and finance. However, there are good empirical reasons for placing
the experience of the manufacturing sector at the heart of any account of
the post-war evolution of the us economy. Manufacturing was by far the
leading sector during the war-time recovery from the Great Depression.
By 1947 it was responsible for around 26 per cent of total value added,
the largest contributor to gdp growth, sustaining a rate of profit significantly higher than the non-manufacturing sectors. It maintained this
leading position up until the late 1970s, providing the main foundation
for America’s globe-conquering economic ascent. Nevertheless, by the
end of the period, its place was much diminished, contributing barely
a tenth of gdp.40 But what is most striking about the declining weight
of manufacturing in gdp is how closely it tracks the overall decline of
economic dynamism from the late 1970s until the present.
Did finance take up the slack? There is no doubt that financial profits are
now responsible for a much larger proportion of corporate profits than
previously. But the question that must be asked is, how are such profits
made? Thomas Philippon’s research on the cost of financial intermediation shows that the cost of moving a dollar from a saver to a borrower
was about two cents in 1910; a hundred years later, it was the same.41 In
other words, finance is no more efficient today than it was then. This
is striking when we consider how information technology and financial
engineering have revolutionized the sector. This puzzle resolves itself
once we recognize that the vast majority of financial innovation is geared
towards figuring out how to siphon off resources through fees, insider
information and lobbying.42 It is not a sector notably marked by increasing efficiency. Nor, of course, is the service sector, where, as Benanav has
demonstrated in Automation and the Future of Work, levels of productivity
growth are typically far lower than in manufacturing, and higher output
Robert Yuskavage and Mahnaz Fahim-Nader, ‘Gross Domestic Product by
Industry for 1947–86: New Estimates Based on the North American Industry
Classification System’, Survey of Current Business, December 2005; us Bureau of
Economic Analysis, ‘Value Added by Industry: Manufacturing as a Percentage of
gdp’, retrieved from fred, Federal Reserve Bank of St Louis.
41
As Philippon puts the point, ‘despite all its fast computers and credit derivatives,
the current financial system does not seem more efficient at transferring funds from
savers to borrowers than the financial system of 1910’: The Great Reversal, p. 213.
42
Philippon, The Great Reversal, pp. 214–6.
40



[p. 49 | PDF p. 25]
riley & brenner: Reply

generally requires an expanded workforce. This was why William Baumol
famously described services as a ‘stagnant sector’, as long ago as 1967.43
The conclusion seems inescapable: the effect of the falling profit rate
in the manufacturing sector from the late 1970s was to make investments in the real economy—that is to say, in the overall production of
goods and services—relatively less attractive, compared to investments
in finance, politics, assets or other forms of rent-seeking activity. It is
true that manufacturing has declined as a share of the economy since
the 1960s. But this reallocation away from manufacturing in favour of
other sectors, especially finance, is precisely what was to be expected as
a result of the downward pressure on the rate of profit experienced by
manufacturing compared to other sectors.
(iii) Has the us profit rate in fact declined as we suggest? Barker crunches
the numbers to argue: ‘It looks like the 1960s (and to a lesser extent the
1950s) saw exceptionally strong profit rates, and that since then there
has been a lower but basically stable cyclical pattern.’44 Are we making
the focus of our analysis what turns out, on closer inspection, to be a
pseudo-trend? It is true that the profit rate has not declined continuously
over the post-war epoch, but we did not contend that it had. Our central
contention was that the post-war macro-economy experienced a twophased evolution—long boom followed by long downturn—and that
this was paralleled by the two-phased evolution of the profit rate, with
the basic trend of the macro-economy explained by the basic trend in
the rate of profit. The economy experienced a significant slowdown, as
evidenced in the lower rates of growth (on average) of the main macroeconomic indicators registered for the 25–30-year period between the
early 1970s and early 2000s, compared to those for the early 1940s to
1970s. That fall-off is behind the long-term deceleration of growth that
we have called the Long Downturn.
Barker does acknowledge the reality of the long downturn, at least to
some degree; he is particularly struck by what appears to him to be an
anomalous failure of investment to behave as it should do, given what
he believes to be a healthy profit rate. He suggests that the major factor
William Baumol, ‘Macroeconomics of Unbalanced Growth: The Anatomy of
Urban Crisis’, American Economic Review, vol. 57, no. 3, June 1967; cited in Aaron
Benanav, Automation and the Future of Work, London and New York 2020, p. 57.
44
Barker, ‘Some Questions’, pp. 47–9.
43



[p. 50 | PDF p. 26]
nlr 155

has been the transformation of corporate governance, often glossed as
the rise of shareholder value. As he puts it:
The most common explanation [of the decline in investment] is that the
shareholder revolution since the 1980s has meant that activist shareholders
possess both the desire and the capacity to enforce a low-investment, highcash pay-out model onto corporate managers.45

The rise of a new regime of corporate governance, in which maximizing
shareholder value rather than maximizing return on investment in plant,
equipment and software is top priority, is a widely acknowledged reality,
especially in the us and the uk. But it is hard to see how reference to this
can constitute an alternative to our account, for it begs the question of
why activist shareholders would want to impose a low-investment model
in the first place. The literature on the shareholder value revolution is
clear in portraying it as a response to the ‘slow economic growth and
high inflation of the 1970s’.46 This makes sense; presumably investors
would not favour a turn to financial engineering if they could expect relatively greater returns on investments in manufacturing. The downward
trend in the rate of profit in manufacturing is the crucial background to
the change in corporate governance: the shareholder value revolution is
a consequence of the diminution of profitable investment outlets, not
the cause of it.
The argument that the shareholder value revolution was the main
cause of lower investment also breaks down in comparative perspective,
because the transformation of corporate governance is largely confined
to the Anglo-American world. For example, while corporate law in the us
explicitly enjoins corporations to act in the interests of their shareholders, no such usage is common in either Germany or France.47 But the
slowdown of investment and growth has been experienced by most of
the wealthy countries. However important the rise of shareholder value
has been for the us, it cannot, then, constitute a general explanation for
declining productive investment.
Barker, ‘Some Questions’, p. 51.
Neil Fligstein and Adam Goldstein, ‘The Legacy of Shareholder Value Capitalism’,
Annual Review of Sociology, vol. 48, July 2022, p. 196.
47
Mark Roe, ‘The Shareholder Wealth Maximization Norm and Industrial
Organization’, University of Pennsylvania Law Review, vol. 149, no. 6, June
2001, p. 2072.
45

46



[p. 51 | PDF p. 27]
riley & brenner: Reply

Broader shifts
Aaron Benanav addresses Barker’s questions about the rate of profit
from another angle, adducing a number of factors that tended to shore
up profit rates from the 1980s, even in the face of their overall decline.
Benanav points to the tendency for the capital share of income to rise,
as a reflection of the declining capacity of labour to resist exploitation,
even as the profit rate has fallen; to the government’s increasing subsidy of demand through fiscal and monetary policy; the increased use of
earnings to speculate in asset or financial markets, encouraged by the
ever more blatant commitment of the us Federal Reserve to bail them
out; and finally, to the relatively successful attempt by Western corporations to move up the global value chain and thereby out of production,
enabling them to protect their incomes even as over-capacity has put
downward pressure on the rate of profit in the now largely outsourced
manufacturing sector.48 We agree with Benanav that these were indeed
powerful countervailing factors to the tendency to falling returns on
investment in conditions of over-capacity. In their absence, the profit
rate would certainly have dropped far lower. What is striking is that, even
despite their presence, average rates of profit for the years of the Long
Downturn are still so far below the average for the Long Boom.49
Benanav proposes an intriguing alternative interpretation to our own,
grounded in the deindustrialization of mature economies—a condition
already affecting China, in his view—and the secular shift into services,
where labour productivity growth is much slower, barely one per cent a
year in the most advanced cases. One consequence over time of the relatively higher productivity growth in manufacturing, he argues, is that
the prices of goods tend to fall compared to the prices of services, creating an objective ‘demand shift’ into services as they come to absorb a
larger proportion of gdp (in the us, services are currently 78 per cent of
gdp). On a global scale, Benanav argues, the over-capacity shock created
by the massive entry of new countries into export-led manufacturing in
this period—first post-war Germany and Japan, then Korea, Taiwan, the
other East Asian tigers and China itself—has been sharply exacerbated
by the simultaneous ‘demand shift’ into services.50
Benanav, ‘A Dissipating Glut?’.
Benanav, ‘A Dissipating Glut?’, pp. 77–78.
50
Benanav writes, ‘Ongoing high productivity growth in industry continued to raise
incomes, but more and more of this additional income was spent on services, rather
than goods. Supply no longer created its own demand.’: ‘A Dissipating Glut?’, p. 73.
48

49



[p. 52 | PDF p. 28]
nlr 155

This is a compelling argument. Benanav is surely right to see the shift
from manufacturing to services as making for an inexorably lower
increase of productivity economy-wide, because raising productivity in
services is as a rule more difficult than in manufacturing, meaning that
a greater input of means of production is needed to secure any given
increase of output (value added). In view of this shift of investment away
from a higher- towards a lower-productivity sector, it was only to be
expected that, all else equal, rates of profit, rates of investment and rates of
gdp growth would fall. That outcome could have been, and was, avoided
to the extent that costs, specifically wage costs, could be held down. But
the reduction in wage growth meant a decline in aggregate demand and
thus pressure towards slower growth via a different channel.

4. political capitalism?
Of all the contentions in ‘Seven Theses’, the most controversial by far
was our claim that we are witnessing the emergence of a new phase
of capitalism. Although Barker agrees that ‘there is something to talk
about here’, he contests the proposition that a new, more politically supported form of accumulation is emerging. Of the instances we cited,
he pointed out:
With the solitary exception of quantitative easing, every item in the list
of new forms of political extraction presented by Riley and Brenner—tax
breaks, the privatization of public assets at bargain basement prices, low
interest rates, stock market booms with irrational consequences, massive state spending aimed directly at private industry—existed at different
points in the 1945–73 ‘golden age’ of capitalism.51

Barker also argues, as does Parmense, that the notion of political capitalism is irreconcilable with Brenner’s previous position, which defined
capitalism, in contrast to feudalism, in terms of its separation of the
economic from the political. As Parmense puts it:
The claim that ‘raw political power’ is the main source of return on capital in the us (it is unclear whether they think this transformation in the
regime of accumulation is a wider development) represents a complete
departure for Brenner. The irony is that for Marxists Brenner’s name is

51

Barker, ‘Some Questions’, pp. 36–7.



[p. 53 | PDF p. 29]
riley & brenner: Reply

almost synonymous with a notion of capitalism hinging on the sharp separation of the political from the economic. Safe to say, the old Brenner would
have scorned the very term ‘political capitalism’ as an oxymoron.52

For Parmense, Brenner must hold either that a re-fusion of the economic with the political is taking place, and to that extent a new mode
of production is emerging, or that the economic and political continue
to be separate and therefore that it makes no sense to talk about a new
system of accumulation. The unhappy halfway house of ‘political capitalism’ is incoherent.
Much of this critique is salutary. We were not sufficiently explicit in
developing the notion of political capitalism—viz., as an emerging
configuration in which politics has a more central role in the economy
than previously. However, the claim of a deep inconsistency between
Brenner’s original position and the arguments that we are developing
is overstated. For example Brenner’s critique of Baran and Sweezy’s
notion of monopoly capitalism did not reject the latter’s analysis per
se, but rather emphasized that it was an over-generalization of ‘specific
aspects of the economy of the us in the 1950s’.53 As Brenner made clear
in The Economics of Global Turbulence, this notion, which was the point
of departure for Baran and Sweezy—that the economy of the us faced
a tendency to secular stagnation before the Second World War and in
its immediate aftermath—made sense so far as it went. But what the
monopoly capitalism thesis did not sufficiently take into account was the
extraordinary opportunities that opened up, for both us multinationals
and their German and Japanese counterparts, in Western Europe and
soon thereafter in East Asia, in the wake of the destruction wrought by
the Second World War, opportunities whose realization would ultimately
detonate the long post-war expansion.

Political capitalism redefined
What then is ‘political capitalism’? The origins of the term are to be sought
in Max Weber, Gabriel Kolko and Murray Rothbard.54 Historically, its
archetypal manifestation was tax-farming, under which groups of entrepreneurs would advance money to the sovereign in exchange for the
Parmense, ‘The Economics of Ideological Turbulence’, p. 5.
Brenner, The Economics of Global Turbulence, p. 54.
54
As John Ganz points out in his ‘Notes on “Political Capitalism”’.
52



[p. 54 | PDF p. 30]
nlr 155

right to collect taxes from a given territory or population. Their ‘profit’
consisted in the difference between the money that they advanced to the
ruler for the right to tax and what they could extract from the population through the exercise of that right. So, these entrepreneurs invested
in politics, the control of means of administration and the means of
violence, as a method for extracting surplus, in this way making for a
politically constituted form of rent.55
The current form of political capitalism is like its historical predecessor in that the surplus takes the form of rent: a return on investment
largely or completely divorced from material production. The distinguishing feature of rents is that they ‘create no wealth’ and that they
‘reduce economic growth and reallocate incomes from the bottom to the
top’.56 Today, however, the key mechanism structuring this rent is not so
much the direct privatization of the state’s fiscal functions, but politically
engineered support for high asset prices. We can thus define political
capitalism in terms of a specific circuit of value expansion. No longer
does the classical capitalist circuit of capital M–C–M’ prevail nearly universally, whereby money is transformed into commodities in the form
of capital and then converted via the process of production for exchange
into money plus a surplus. There has emerged alongside it a new circuit of capital whereby a surplus is realized through the investment of
money in assets—viz. M–A–M’.57
It should be stressed that this new circuit of capital—featuring the
investment of money in assets, rather than commodities—has taken
its place alongside the older classical one, but is far from having fully
replaced it. Our thesis therefore differs from that of ‘technofeudalism’
to which it might seem related. Technofeudalism is the idea that new
forms of extraction have emerged based on ‘platform rents’ or ‘cloud
rents’, paid by firms or small businesses to tech companies to access
Max Weber, Economy and Society: An Outline of Interpretive Sociology, Oakland ca
1978, pp. 965–6.
56
Petér Mihály and Iván Szelényi, ‘The Place of Rent-Seeking and Corruption
in Varieties of Capitalism Models’, in Tamás Gerőcs and Miklós Szanyi, eds,
Market Liberalism and Economic Patriotism in the Capitalist World-System, London
2019, p. 70.
57
Brett Christophers suggests the term ‘asset manager society’: Our Lives in Their
Portfolios, pp. 73–5. We think Christophers’s description is compelling, but we
would emphasize the active role of the state in creating the conditions for the continuing expansion of the value of assets: hence political capitalism.
55



[p. 55 | PDF p. 31]
riley & brenner: Reply

their tech platforms to market and sell their products.58 We do not doubt
that this sort of extraction occurs, but we differ from some exponents
of the technofeudal idea because they tend to associate the tech giants
with the consolidation of a new monopoly capitalism. Certainly, the big
tech companies would like to be monopolists and they have gone to
great lengths to secure direct state support for their effort. But the fact
remains that the enterprises of the tech sector continue to be subject to
the competitive constraint, dependent on investment and highly rivalrous terms of technical advance.59 The tech sector’s operation is not all
that distinct from the rest of the productive economy, as the recent disruption imposed on the sector by DeepSeek brings home.
It remains the case that, alongside and entangled with what could be
termed the productive sector, a large group of politically dependent
firms and households persists, which is profoundly reliant on a policy
of easy credit on the part of government, even if the politics it enunciates is laissez faire in words. Small and medium-sized firms as well as
households are waterlogged with debt, as borrowing has continued to
climb since the financial crisis. Profit margins for small businesses have
been intermittently negative since 2000.60 The us economy as a whole
is sustained by lending, backed up by government, with profits accruing
from production under excruciating pressure.
Has political capitalism existed before? Parmense puts the point sharply:
‘Should we now conclude on the basis of this new conception that Nazi
Germany, for example, was capitalist in conformity with this general
logic but that contemporary America has somehow broken this mould
For specifications of this argument see: Cédric Durand, How Silicon Valley
Unleashed Techno-Feudalism: The Making of the Digital Economy, London and
New York 2024, p. 132–41; Yanis Varoufakis, Techno-Feudalism: What Killed
Capitalism, London 2023, pp. 128–9; Jodie Dean, Capital’s Grave: Neofeudalism and
the New Class Struggle, London and New York 2025, pp. 92–93. For a good critique
of this literature see Evgeny Morozov, ‘Critique of Techno-Feudal Reason’, nlr
133/134, Jan–April 2022; unfortunately, this otherwise strong article displays the
author’s tendency to deny any specificity to contemporary capitalism. For a similar
critique, see Nicholas Vrousalis, ‘Techno-Feudalism Is Just Capitalism’, Catalyst,
vol. 9, no. 1, 2025. Vrousalis assures us that ‘capitalism is alive and well’. One can
well agree with the applicability of the first adjective while doubting the appropriateness of the second.
59
Durand, How Silicon Valley Unleashed Techno-Feudalism, p. 71–7.
60
McCarthy, The Master’s Tools, pp. 79–81.
58



[p. 56 | PDF p. 32]
nlr 155

and is now subject to a different one?’61 As noted above, we think that
the economic problems of the 1930s are actually strikingly analogous
to those that face capitalism today. But a capitalist solution, presumably
requiring the flushing out of excess capacity through widespread bankruptcy, has proved elusive. Instead, the entire private economy floats on
a mountain of politically engineered debt defended by governments.
Barker is sceptical of this argument. He sees it as one more instance
of a ‘distressingly common picture of the Fed as a permanent conduit of the easy money desired by Wall Street’. This position ‘not only
neglects decades of Marxist state theory’ but is ‘impossible to square
with the Fed’s current monetary tightening’. It also exemplifies ‘confusion about whether or not the us government finances itself through
taxation’ and suggests that ‘taxpayers are not direct producers, at least
not qua taxpayers’, and therefore cannot really be exploited. Barker is
right to observe that ‘monetary policy stances’ always have ‘distributional consequences’.62 It was not our intention to praise or condemn
any one of them, but rather to make the point that, as a rule, monetary
policy is an ineffective instrument for reviving profitability and restarting investment—a contention at the heart of the theoretical perspective
of Summers, Hansen and Keynes himself. The basic idea was brought
out clearly by James Crotty in his account of Keynes’s analysis of the
transition from the boom years of the 1920s to the depressed decade of
the 1930s:
An interest rate low enough to have generated the low unemployment
rates of the late 1920s also fuelled an unsustainable financial market boom
whose eventual crash brought the whole system down with it. You cannot permanently sustain a capitalist investment boom via low interest rates
without simultaneously fuelling a financial market bubble.63

Monetary policy has limited power to restart productive investment on
its own, because it is not the rate of interest but the rate of profit that
is the decisive factor. A sufficient rate of profit requires the existence
of adequate outlets for investment, outlets that offer sufficient returns
Parmense, ‘The Economics of Ideological Turbulence’, p. 6.
Barker, ‘Some Questions’, pp. 43–5.
63
Crotty, Keynes Against Capitalism, p. 267.
61

62



[p. 57 | PDF p. 33]
riley & brenner: Reply

on investment.64 In the absence of profitable places to invest, reducing
interest rates will tend to skew investment demand in the direction of
finance and asset markets, producing bubbles rather than generating
growth.65 No doubt a restrictive interest-rate policy will tend to undercut
economic growth directly. But easy money alone cannot spark increased
investment in the real economy. Policymakers are caught on the horns
of a dilemma. They must loosen credit to promote growth, but they
must tighten credit to rein in the speculation and inflation that will likely
accompany any expansion that results.
Are we confused about how the us government now finances itself, as
Barker avers? In our view, it does so primarily through debt, debt that
must be financed through a regressive fiscal-tax system that transfers
income from the bottom of the distribution to the top. If wage earners
are paying taxes, and those taxes are then being used to pay interest on
debts held by the wealthy, then wage earners are no less exploited than
were peasants subject to tax-farmers in the late Roman Empire or earlymodern Europe. That is to say: tax payers are precisely under the yoke of
political capitalism, in this instance.

5. political reconfigurations
We turn now to the second aspect of ‘Seven Theses’, which aimed not
just to analyse the long waves of capitalist development but to lay bare
their related political dynamics. Again, we should briefly clarify the
framework within which the text was written. Here we should stress
that the current form of capitalist democracy, characterized by regular
universal-suffrage elections and the alternation in power of competing parties of government, was largely an achievement of the post-war
epoch. If the cataclysm of the First World War largely destroyed the
ancien régime in Europe, it was the Second that opened the way to universal suffrage, under American military predominance, and at least
Hansen, Full Recovery or Stagnation?, pp. 312–3; Crotty, Keynes Against
Capitalism, p. 264.
65
Sharma, in a typically lucid formulation, puts the point this way: ‘Unfortunately,
central banks can create all the money they want, but cannot control where it will
go. Instead of fuelling growth in the real economy, as central banks hoped, easy
money went into financial assets’: What Went Wrong with Capitalism, p. 76.
64



[p. 58 | PDF p. 34]
nlr 155

began the process of unravelling Jim Crow in the us South.66 But a fundamental pre-condition for the success of capitalist democracy was the
unprecedented post-war economic boom, reflecting the greatest wave of
capital accumulation in history.
Political dynamics were crucially shaped by continuing capitalist profitability, because this made for the continued growth of income that
provided the ultimate fiscal basis for government. In this respect, rapid
growth during the Long Boom opened the way for a positive-sum game
between capitalists and workers, premised on a growing economic
pie. It made sense in this context for both capital and labour to forego
hard-fought struggles in their own interests to keep the economy as a
whole growing. The result, in the electoral realm, was a tendency to
class compromise. In the us this expressed itself in the programmatic
convergence of the two major parties, which underwrote the political stability of the post-war decades.67 In other words, during the Long Boom
the maintenance of profitability was to an extent compatible with some
redistribution towards workers in the form of public expenditures and
social insurance programmes.
Capitalist profitability remained a determining factor of politics after the
Long Boom ended, but in the era of low growth, its implications were
reversed; the battle to maintain the rate of profit became incompatible
with downward redistribution, leading to a sharp capitalist offensive. The
initial reaction of labour in the 1960s and 70s was a ferocious round of
working-class militancy to defend incomes, overlapping with an intensive wave of popular struggles to expand social rights. Subsequently,
however, this gave way to new structures of working-class subordination
Sheri Berman effectively makes this point in Democracy and Dictatorship in Europe:
From the Ancien Régime to the Present Day, Oxford 2019, p. 386. It is an important
argument also for Göran Therborn, who writes, ‘The big boom of democracy came
in the aftermath of the Second World War, with only Swiss sexism and us racism
holding out until the 1970s. The conclusion would appear to be that bourgeois
democracy is largely a martial accomplishment’: ‘The Rule of Capital and the Rise
of Democracy’, nlr I/103, May–June 1977. He went on to nuance this judgement by
emphasizing internal connections between democracy and capitalism.
67
For the classic statement of this argument see Adam Przeworski, Capitalism and
Social Democracy, Cambridge 1986, pp. 138–42, 155–56. For a development of the
notion of ‘positive class compromise’ see Erik Olin Wright, ‘Working-Class Power,
Capitalist-Class Interests and Class Compromise’, American Journal of Sociology,
vol. 105, no. 4, January 2000, pp. 958–60.
66



[p. 59 | PDF p. 35]
riley & brenner: Reply

to capital, emerging unevenly across the different national terrains.
Within the political field, one segment of the working class turned
towards the multicultural technocracy of the ‘third way’, while another
embraced a politics of reactionary nationalism. With the Great Recession
that set in after the crash of 2008, this segment came to constitute the
mass base of the new far right.
The Long Downturn saw a shift in the relationship between capital and
the state. The distribution of income and wealth shifted from a positivesum to a zero-sum game, while wielding political power came to rival the
pursuit of economic ‘efficiency’ as a factor determining distributional
outcomes. In the absence of growth, no party could offer a credible programme capable of sustaining an electoral majority. Their inability to
deliver the goods once in office opened the way for their adversaries to
channel anti-incumbency sentiment, with economic promises increasingly replaced by appeals to cultural identities. These trends have been
deeply corrosive of capitalist democracy. Those dependent on wage
income saw their capacity to influence the state decline, while the state
itself saw its capacity to pursue policies in the interest of the working
class, however limited, decay. The outcome has been a new configuration of political struggle.

Class and party
Empirically, the realignment of party support and educational level has
been one of the most robust findings in contemporary social science.68
Higher levels of formal education used to be correlated with voting for
conservative parties, and lower levels with voting for the left, but this
relationship has undergone a volte face. The trend has been underway
since the late 1970s, corresponding to the onset of the Long Downturn.
For the us, Piketty found that in the 1960s, those in the top decile for
years of schooling tended to vote Democratic at a 12-point lower rate
than the bottom 90 per cent. But this highly educated group has moved
steadily towards the Democrats; by 2016, they voted Democrat at a
24-point higher rate than those in the bottom 90 per cent.69
Thomas Piketty, Capital and Ideology, Cambridge 2020, pp. 37–9. It is certainly
questionable to what degree this ‘dealignment’ is ‘class dealignment’. For the us,
see Jared Abbott, ‘Understanding Class Dealignment’, Catalyst, vol. 7, no. 5, 2024.
69
Piketty, Capital and Ideology, pp. 744, 814. See also Matt Grossman and David
Hopkins, Polarized by Degrees, Cambridge 2024, pp. 125–35.
68



[p. 60 | PDF p. 36]
nlr 155

Parallel shifts have taken place in terms of occupation. From the 1920s
to the 1960s, a majority of skilled and unskilled blue-collar workers, as
well as some service workers, voted Democrat. Jared Abbott shows that
over 70 per cent of manual workers identified as Democrats in 1970; by
2015, that figure had dropped to just over 30 per cent. A similar decline
occurred among service workers, with a more gradual fall for clerks and
no discernible trend for managers. Over the same period teachers, as
well as healthcare workers and public employees, have shifted towards
the Democrats. Today, as Michael Hout points out, ‘affinities between
Democrats and teachers may be as strong and significant as the former
links between Democrats and blue-collar workers.’70 Race, historically
the most important divide within the us working class, interacts with
these divisions. Whites in general have tended to be more right-wing
than non-whites, but this may be changing, as the educational divide
becomes increasingly important, so that non-credentialled non-whites
are also moving to the right.71
In sum, the us working class can be seen as dividing into four segments:
white non-credentialled workers, white credentialled workers, non-white
non-credentialled workers, and non-white credentialled workers. The
first group, the so-called ‘white working class’, is numerically the largest,
though declining, and is concentrated in electorally crucial states, above
all the Upper Midwest. It forms one of the largest mass constituencies
for a radical right party anywhere in the advanced-capitalist world. Nonwhite non-credentialled workers, mainly non-college Blacks and Latinos,
tend to be less locked into conservative politics than their white counterparts, but they too are moving right. Meanwhile those with college
degrees, ‘credentialled workers’, are moving left and increasingly constitute the mass base of the Democratic Party, particularly its left wing.
Matthew Karp’s critique of ‘Seven Theses’ sometimes blurs these distinctions, tending to equate education with class. This is a common move on
the left; Abbott, for example, commenting on the 2024 election, tells us
that ‘educational polarization—that is, class—is a major part of the story.’
This is mistaken. As Melinda Cooper notes, the idea that the majority of
Respectively, Abbott, ‘Understanding Class Dealignment’, p. 85; Michael Hout,
‘The Realignment of us Presidential Voting, 1972–2016’, in David Grusky, ed.,
Social Stratification: Race, Class and Gender in Sociological Perspective, Boulder 2021.
See also Piketty, Capital and Ideology, p. 752.
71
Grossman and Hopkins, Polarized by Degrees, pp. 106, 156–9.
70



[p. 61 | PDF p. 37]
riley & brenner: Reply

lower-income wage earners are ‘blue-collar private-sector workers with
little or no college education’ is ‘deeply anachronistic’.72 Karp frames his
response to our piece with a comparison of two Minnesota cities, rustbelt Hibbing and leafy North Oaks:
In Riley and Brenner’s analysis, the workers of Hibbing were driven by
‘rational’ resistance to the (largely theoretical) prospect of economic competition with a Salvadoran or Somali immigrant. But it seems far more
plausible that they have been mobilized in ‘rational’ resistance to the
educated elite of North Oaks, whose power over the institutions and industries that shape their lives—from Facebook pages to hospital centres—is
anything but abstract.73

While the rhetorical power of this portrayal is undeniable, it remains
ambiguous. A conflict between ‘workers’ and the ‘educated elite’,
although certainly important, is not necessarily a class conflict; having
a credential, a diploma or a degree does not necessarily mean having a
high income or owning a productive asset. The workers who are moving
right are not being politically organized as a class but mobilized on a
nativist basis against other groups of workers. What is occurring, then,
is the political fragmentation of the working class, not a new form of
class struggle.
Why is this happening? There are two prevailing explanations. The
first is culturalist, citing longstanding traditions of racism or nativism
among white workers as the explanation for class dealignment. Karp and
Parmense both attribute this view to us, thus interpreting our account
as an apologia for the Democratic Party, presented as the passive victim
of a benighted electorate. As Karp argues, our analysis ‘loses its way,
skidding instead towards a shallow conception that begins to resemble
Blue America’s flattering image of itself’. Parmense suggests we
‘uncritically’ reproduce ‘progressive misrepresentations of Trumpism
as the politics of white working-class privilege’.74 In fact, we reject the
culturalist explanation.
Jared Abbott, ‘Liberal Dominance of Cultural Institutions Hurt the Left’, Jacobin,
20 November 2024; Melinda Cooper, Counterrevolution: Extravagance and Austerity
in Public Finance, Princeton 2024, p. 109. For an intelligent discussion of the conceptual and empirical problems with class dealignment see Chris Maisano, ‘Is This
Really the “Age of Class Dealignment”?’, Jacobin, 3 March 2025.
73
Karp, ‘Party and Class’, p. 143.
74
Karp, ‘Party and Class’, p. 136; Parmense, ‘The Economics of Ideological
Turbulence’.
72



[p. 62 | PDF p. 38]
nlr 155

This is not to deny the substantial evidence that non-credentialled wage
earners are at least potentially open to reactionary politics. Seymour
Martin Lipset long ago noted that, while workers favour welfare-state
measures, ‘when liberalism is defined in noneconomic terms—as
support for civil liberties, internationalism, etc.—the correlation is
reversed’. McCarthyism had shown that ‘an irresponsible demagogue
who combines a nationalist and anti-elitist appeal can still secure considerable support from the less educated’.75 More recent surveys show that
workers without a college degree tend to embrace more ‘authoritarian
values’, as measured by the Schwartz scale of openness to new information. Exit polls point to the same conclusion. Running as a flamboyantly
authoritarian figure in 2020, Trump won among whites without a college degree by 25 points, expanding this to 31 points in 2024. Conversely,
credentialled voters, a group that used to support Barry Goldwater, now
lean Democrat by double-digit margins.76
The culturalist interpretation is not wrong, then, to note the emergence
of a dramatic educational divide, nor to emphasize the secular character
of this process; but its explanation of what causes the divide is implausible. Advocates of the culturalist position tend to endow education itself
with liberalizing qualities, portraying the credentialled as inevitably
broad-minded and tolerant, while the non-credentialled remain prisoners of their narrow experience. Thus, Norris and Inglehart write in
Cultural Backlash, ‘In addition to being strongly linked with having postmaterial values and socially liberal attitudes, education expands people’s
cognitive skills, knowledge and capacities.’77 Degree holders appear here
as something like Hegel’s universal estate. But this is an ideology of
technocracy, not an analysis. Its account cannot, moreover, explain why
the broad-minded educated group used to be a primarily right-leaning
constituency, and in the interwar period was probably well-disposed
towards fascism. Clearly, a better explanation is needed.
The second explanation for the rightward shift of non-credentialled
workers blames the craven neoliberal turn of the Democrats and other
Seymour Martin Lipset, Political Man: The Social Bases of Politics, New York 1960,
pp. 101–2, 125.
76
See Pippa Norris and Ronald Inglehart, Cultural Backlash: Trump, Brexit and
Authoritarian Populism, Cambridge 2019, pp. 110–14; ap VoteCast, ‘How America
Voted in 2024’; Grossmann and Hopkins, Polarized by Degrees, p. 129.
77
Norris and Inglehart, Cultural Backlash, pp. 38–9.
75



[p. 63 | PDF p. 39]
riley & brenner: Reply

centre-left parties. This resembles earlier analyses of social democracy
that saw its accommodation to capitalism or backing for the Great War as
‘treachery’.78 It suffers from the same basic problem, in that it imagines
political parties to possess an agency they do not have. Thus Karp claims
that ‘class dealignment was chosen’.79 Lola Seaton grasps the underlying
difference well. In ‘Reflections’, she writes:
Secular stagnation . . . is presented as something that reconfigures politics,
but which politics, so reconfigured . . . appears all but powerless to alter. In
this regard Karp’s alternative, more precise timeline of class dealignment,
is an expression of a telling difference, of emphasis if not perspective.
If the long downturn and the pivot to politicized plunder prepared the
ground, what expedited the movement of the ‘have nots’ away from the
Democrats was the substantive transformation of the Party itself—into a
‘fundamentally technocratic’, ardently neoliberal party that could claim ‘a
new kind of predominance atop America’s social, cultural and economic
hierarchies’—which, Karp argues, toppled the rickety alignments on which
it had formerly relied.80

Karp, in Seaton’s summary, wants to lay ‘greater emphasis—and
blame—on political decision making’. But in our view, Karp’s understandable antipathy towards the Democratic establishment clouds his
understanding of why they behaved this way. To begin with a simple
methodological point. Democratic Party politicos and the consultants
who advise them are single-mindedly focused on winning elections;
only then will they be able to pursue the goals they set themselves, whatever those happen to be. They have a vast trove of information about the
electorate and the sorts of messages likely to appeal to the voters they
must reach. Left commentators continually hammer home the message
that Democrats could win very easily if they adopted more redistributive
policies.81 But it seems implausible that these power-hungry leaders
Przeworski, Capitalism and Social Democracy, p. 2.
Matthew Karp, ‘The Politics of a Second Gilded Age’, Jacobin, 17 February 2021,
p. 105.
80
Seaton, ‘Reflections on “Political Capitalism”’, p. 21.
81
See, among myriad examples in Jacobin and elsewhere: ‘Our findings underscore
that Democrats can win back working-class voters by focusing on economic populist policies. It may seem obvious, but most Democratic candidates and strategists
have failed to grasp this simple formula in recent years’: Sean Mason, ‘Democrats
Act Like Elections Are Complicated. They’re Not’, Jacobin, 22 July 2025. For a more
elaborate statement of the same position see Philip Rocco, ‘Why the Democrats Are
So Useless’, Catalyst, vol. 9, no. 1, 2025.
78

79



[p. 64 | PDF p. 40]
nlr 155

would forego a winning electoral strategy if it were readily available. The
usual counter to this is that us election campaigns are extraordinarily
expensive, so anyone aspiring to win office must spend a huge amount
of time currying favour with wealthy donors; the Harris campaign spent
well over a billion dollars in the last cycle. Members of Congress of both
parties must raise money. Clearly this biases the entire political system
in favour of pro-rich policies and away from redistributive measures. But
this is an objective constraint, not a ‘choice’ by the Democrat leadership.
Furthermore, it applies to both parties. The ‘betrayal’ argument cannot
explain the apparently asymmetrical impact of money and politics: why
would the rise of the donor class undermine the Democrats’ appeal to
non-credentialled voters, but not that of the Republicans?
Two further empirical points tell against the theory of party agency, or
‘betrayal’. The first is chronological. Karp dates the shift of blue-collar
workers away from the Democratic Party to the past decade, and to 2016
in particular, noting the scale of their vote for Obama in 2012.82 But
if 2016 was a tipping point, the trend had begun four decades earlier;
it was highlighted by Kevin Phillips as early as 1969.83 The decline in
support for the Democrats among non-college-educated whites gathered speed in the 1970s and 80s, briefly plateaued in the 90s, then
accelerated again in the 2000s. There was a further dramatic shift
after Obama’s second win, in the trough of the Great Recession, when
non-credentialled voters in the bottom third of the income distribution
abandoned the Democrats, while the degree-holding top third turned
sharply towards them; only 30 per cent of the latter group identified as
Democrats in 1995, but this had shot up to over 50 per cent by 2020.84
A similar trend can be seen in presidential elections. A major turning point occurred during the Reagan years, when Republicans put an
appeal to blue-collar workers at the heart of their political strategy. White
non-credentialled workers moved away from the Democrats, whether
they ran a McGovern, a Carter, an Obama, a Bill or Hillary Clinton, a
Biden or a Harris. The historical record suggests they have been powerless to resist this electoral realignment.85
Karp, ‘Party and Class’, p. 141.
Kevin Phillips, Newly Emerging Republican Majority, Princeton 1969.
84
Abbott, ‘Understanding Class Dealignment’, p. 84.
85
The 1972 McGovern candidacy is a case in point. McGovern ran the most
left-wing redistributionist campaign of any Democratic presidential candidate
in history, at a moment when the New Deal coalition was still largely intact,
82
83



[p. 65 | PDF p. 41]
riley & brenner: Reply

That the Democratic Party was fundamentally an ‘opportunistic shape-shifter’, in Seaton’s words, rather than the agent of its own
coalition-making, is strongly suggested by the comparative evidence.
If it were true that us Democrats were especially prone to throwing in
their lot with the highly educated, rich and not so rich, and this was why
they chose class dealignment, there should be some cases in which a
centre-left party resisted the change. But the realignment of electoral
coalitions is not an American peculiarity; it is virtually universal across
the advanced-capitalist world.86 Rather than abandoning blue-collar
workers, the Democratic Party seems to be adapting to a new electoral
landscape that it was powerless to prevent from coming into being—in
which much of the working class lurched towards the right and was
therefore no longer available to it.

6. a materialist analysis
In our view, the tendency of centre-left parties to be politically conservative and tactically timid reflects not only the social character of those at
the top but also their strategic situation. Once such a party has decided to
operate within a capitalist framework, even the most sincere social democrats must try to ensure that capitalist profits are sufficient to secure
the investment and growth required to pursue any pro-working-class
redistributive policies.87 Centre-left leaders understand this intuitively
and have long prioritized the interests of capital. Even as capitalist
economies have become increasingly stagnant, that strategic calculus
has continued to hold. Parties in office perpetually try to incentivize
capitalists to increase investment because—absent the socialization of
investment—they remain dependent on private owners to produce the
economic growth they need to pursue reforms.88 The problem is that
unionization rates were high and de-industrialization had yet to begin, yet the
result was a massive electoral landslide for Nixon. If it were ever possible for the
Democrats to win back white workers through a redistributionist electoral appeal, it
should have happened then. Grossmann and Hopkins, Polarized by Degrees, p. 82.
86
Piketty, Capital and Ideology, p. 869.
87
Przeworski, Capitalism and Social Democracy, p. 42, where Przeworski writes:
‘The very capacity of social democrats to regulate the economy depends upon the
profits of capital.’
88
Robert Brenner, ‘The Paradox of Social Democracy’, in Mike Davis, Fred Pfeil and
Michael Sprinker, eds, The Year Left Volume 1, An American Socialist Yearbook: 1985,
London and New York 1985, p. 48.



[p. 66 | PDF p. 42]
nlr 155

growth and capital accumulation have been anaemic, with the consequence that any party that hopes to keep control of government has had
to make ever greater concessions to capitalists to induce them to invest,
with the corollary that they have offered the working class less and less.
With this has come the unravelling of the social-democratic coalition.
At the same time, the material pressures on workers to pursue their
interests as defined by educational, racial, ethnic or gender identity,
rather than their common interests qua workers, have been greatly
strengthened, in ways that split the working class between two political strategies, both subordinate to capital. First, for workers without a
college degree in the us, the general context is one of increasing scarcity: access to secure long-term employment and basic social services is
more limited than ever. In the absence of a class alternative, an obvious
strategy for these workers is to defend their own segment of the working class against others. It makes sense, that is, for them to organize
as a native working class against non-native workers, or a male working class against a female one. This politics has manifested itself in a
variety of ways: tax revolts, the struggle against affirmative action and
now against dei; earlier struggles against integrated schooling and
integrated neighbourhoods.89
The attack on social spending is at the heart of right-wing working-class
politics. This might seem irrational, since non-credentialled whites
are an important consumer of whatever health and social insurance
spending is available in the us. However, in the absence of any obvious
way of redistributing income from capital to labour, it is a rational
second-best option to support capitalist profitability in the short term.
This is one basis of the broad and durable working-class support for
supply-side economic policies and their attack on social spending.90 A
further material reason intersects with the phenomenon of bubblenomics. As some of the more privileged sections of the non-credentialled
working class managed to buy their own homes, they came think of
themselves as asset owners whose interests were defined as much by
Johanna Brenner and Robert Brenner, ‘Reagan, the Right and the Working Class’,
Against the Current, vol. 1, no. 2, Winter 1981. See also Cooper, Counterrevolution,
pp. 143–5, who describes how the combination of stagnating wages and rising
home values created the conditions for the infamous Proposition 13 electoral coalition in California and the subsequent national rise of Reaganism.
90
For a lucid explanation of the logic of this politics see Przeworski, Capitalism and
Social Democracy, p. 212.
89



[p. 67 | PDF p. 43]
riley & brenner: Reply

property taxes and interest rates as by wages and employment. Many
benefited from the asset-price inflation that was intentionally promoted
in the 1980s and 90s, closely connected to the assault on wage earners
and reduction of social spending. The right-wing offensive had a natural
appeal to them.91
A striking illustration of the material grounds for right-wing
working-class politics is to be found in ‘Trump’s Kryptonite’, a 2023
paper published by the Center for Working Class Politics, which is all
the more noteworthy in that the authors were trying to prove the opposite—to bolster the argument that Democrats should turn to ‘economic
populism’ as a recipe for electoral success. Instead, their findings show
that ‘securing the border’ is the most popular policy among workingclass voters, while decriminalizing immigration scores worst. Tax credits
for small businesses came second and a federal jobs guarantee ranked
third.92 The long march to the right of the non-credentialled segment of
the working class, particularly whites, can best be grasped as the expression of clear material interests. For lack of better options, this group
turns to its ‘primary identities’ to defend its corner of the labour market
and protect the value of its small-scale assets. It embraces a populist
form of supply-side economics and attacks social spending which it sees,
with some justification, as redistributive away from itself and towards
other segments of the working class. In general, these strategies tend
to strengthen the power of owners vis-à-vis workers, but that does not
mean that local victories, such as Proposition 13’s defeat of property
taxes in California, cannot speak to the material interests of this segment. Thus Parmense’s scepticism that non-college-educated whites
have materially benefited from voting for the right seems misplaced; on
their own terms, they have notched up some victories, particularly tax
cuts, even if these proved self-defeating in the longer term.93

Graduate insecurities
The correlate of this process has been the rise of a layer of credentialholders within the working class with quite different material interests.
Cooper, Counterrevolution, pp. 168–70.
Center for Working-Class Politics, ‘Trump’s Kryptonite: How Progressives Can
Win Back the Working Class’, 2023, p. 31.
93
Parmense, ‘The Economics of Ideological Turbulence’. On material wins, see
Cooper, Counterrevolution, p. 113.
91

92



[p. 68 | PDF p. 44]
nlr 155

Through to the 1980s it was perhaps possible to imagine degree-holders
as an aspiring ‘professional managerial class’; but no longer. For one
thing, their numbers have exploded: some 38 per cent of Americans over
25 now have a bachelor’s degree, compared to 11 per cent in 1968. They
now form a large part of the labour force and a decisively important electoral bloc—around 40 per cent of all who voted in 2020, and 56 per cent
in the 2022 midterms.94 Credentialled workers are not necessarily much
wealthier than their non-credentialled peers: one in three workers with
some college education is on a low wage. The average wage premium
for getting a college education is boosted by the high returns accruing
to a few degrees in finance, economics and computer science. Although
there is a broad correlation between education and income, a substantial
number of credentialled workers are under relative economic stress.95
The majority of these credentialled workers are employed in the service sector, especially in education, healthcare, the non-profit sector
and the apparatuses of corporate compliance. Services, of course, are a
low-productivity, low-profitability sector, highly dependent on state spending. This gives its employees a material interest, shared by their managers,
in raising public expenditure; it can open the way for a cross-class alliance
between owners of hospitals, insurance companies and their workers
to maintain Medicare and Medicaid payments, for example. This is not
to deny a real clash of interests in this sector over wages, staffing levels
and working conditions, but simply to indicate that a basis for collaboration also exists. Related tendencies can be found in the public-sector
work force more broadly. Teachers’ unions, among the most militant in
recent years, often orient their claims not so much against their immediate supervisors as against the state. This sector is naturally supportive of
social spending, since their own employment depends on it. The fact that
these professions are often numerically dominated by women and people
of colour gives them an extra impetus to politicize to the left.96
The growing world of non-profits, foundations and charities is another
field of employment for the credentialled. The number of people working in this sector in the us now exceeds the number of manufacturing
workers. These bodies are dedicated to offering technocratic solutions
to social problems: above all racial discrimination. The income of
Grossmann and Hopkins, Polarized by Degrees, p. 38.
Cooper, Counterrevolution, p. 110.
96
For a subtle discussion of this dynamic see Cooper, Counterrevolution, pp. 135–6.
94
95



[p. 69 | PDF p. 45]
riley & brenner: Reply

their employees is premised on the identification of social problems
as amenable, at least in theory, to technocratic solutions.97 This world
cooperates closely with the social-service wing of the state, with which
it shares objectives and personnel; this again provides a material interest that tends to push the credentialled group to support the centre-left.
Finally, a small group of credentialled workers has been able to capture a
portion of the rent flowing to the owners of capital; with incomes in the
$108,000–$150,000 range, they have done well over the Long Downturn
period, though of course not as well as the top 1 per cent.98 This group,
highly educated and well rewarded, tends to support culturally liberal
policies but is more sceptical about social spending. This opens a fault
line within the credentialled group between this wealthy segment and
the less well-off. But this is a largely intramural conflict that has little to
do with the struggle against capital per se.
It is understandable that credentialled wage workers have come to
constitute the mass base of the Democratic Party and of centre-left
parties elsewhere.99 This group’s material interests create the possibility for an alliance with capital that is analogous to that of asset-owning
non-credentialled workers. For them, it is rational to support the elaborate system of state backing for private companies in the health and
education sectors; ironically, the demand ‘Medicare for All’ implies
a massive handout to the private medical system. The Democrats,
as the party of the credentialled working class, can offer a form of
state-mediated trickle-down economics, in which huge subsidies to private industry sustain some of the basic material interests of those who
work there. In return, college-educated voters vote massively for the
Democrats, often with little enthusiasm but also little choice.
The reason why the two major parties pursue the sort of politics they
do is fundamentally rooted in the social structure of the contemporary us, in its political-capitalist phase. Wage workers as a whole find
class action increasingly difficult to pursue, as capital becomes ever
more dependent on political support to secure its profits. In this context, the non-credentialled segment of the working class, especially if
Grossmann and Hopkins, Polarized by Degrees, pp. 192–4.
Piketty, Capital in the Twenty-First Century, p. 371.
99
It is interesting that Steven Miller, perhaps the most powerful non-elected figure in the Trump White House, describes the ‘radicalized’ opposition to Trump as
consisting of workers in ‘child services, law clerks, hospital nurses, teachers, gov’t
workers, even dod employees’: Stephen Miller, X.com post, 13 September 2025.
97

98



[p. 70 | PDF p. 46]
nlr 155

it ‘possesses’ the advantage of being native or white, turns to its primary identity to redistribute income towards itself, through an all-out
assault on social spending. The credentialled segment, in contrast, seeks
to support and extend social spending because it works largely in the
low-profitability service sector. At a mass level, then, the material basis
of political conflict in the us is predominantly a struggle between these
two segments of the working class over social expenditure.

Political possibilities
This analysis might seem unremittingly bleak, but the present order
is deeply contradictory in ways that might create political openings for
a less toxic future. As Seaton points out in her critical analysis of the
‘Seven Theses’ debate, the delinking of ‘money making’ from profitable
production in one sense ‘delegitimizes the capitalist class, by attenuating the structural connection between their self-enrichment and general
welfare’.100 The hegemonic strength of capital, its ability to present the
specific interests of capitalists as being in the general interest of society
as a whole, has been to a certain extent hollowed out in the new phase.
What should be evident to all sides is that we are faced with the difficult
task of grasping the present as history. For the left, no existing political
formula is adequate for the wilderness in which it finds itself. Social
democracy, Bolshevism, the New Deal, the political revolts of the 1960s
and 70s, all unfolded in a period of capitalism vastly different from our
own. What is needed is a critical theorization of the new structures
with which we are now dealing. Both ‘Seven Theses’ and the present
response to the stimulating debate that text engendered have attempted
to begin that work. Doubtless we have fallen short in numerous ways.
But we hope at least to have contributed to the task of considering what
capitalism actually is now, what sort of politics flow from that and the
strategic opportunities that those politics open—and foreclose.

100

Seaton, ‘Reflections on “Political Capitalism”’, p. 23.
