The Thesis of Political Capitalism
Riley; The Ideas Letter
[em:GEFERFPB]
LLM bundle copy: text only; source original retained unchanged.
Page markers give the printed page where detected and always give the source PDF page.

[PDF p. 1]
The Thesis of Political Capitalism
theideasletter.org/essay/the-thesis-of-political-capitalism

It is as if the open theft, the corruption, the orgiastic excesses of the elite were so brazen
that it would seem superficial, non-scientific, pre-theoretical to take them seriously. Surely,
this line of thinking says, the real action lies elsewhere, behind the Technicolored
phantasmagoria of the political scene, with its low-life boobies and con-men. But it is
precisely this—the theoretical elucidation of the chaotic obscenity of our current moment—
that is most required. What follows is the roughest and most telescopic of attempts to do
just that.
There are, to begin with, three striking features of the post-2008 political economy: low
growth rates, high levels of inequality, and a scrambled political landscape. A considerable
proportion of workers—especially those who lack educational credentials—has shifted to
the far right, while a corresponding share of the educated has shifted to the left. Any
adequate critical social theory needs to begin from these basic realities. But how to explain
them?
There are two main responses. One is to suggest that the new, post-2008 period is what
“normal” capitalism looks like. The anomaly, from this perspective, was the high-growth,
low-inequality period of the thirty glorious years. Now we’re returning to a low-growth
system—which is how capitalism has operated for most of its history. So, as the work of
Thomas Piketty has indicated, the new political economy is an old political economy: it’s
just that our vision has been distorted by the experience of the twentieth century.1
The second response is to ascribe these changes to technology—particularly to the ability
of the owners of technology companies to extract rents from their users. The basic idea is
that as more people come to use a specific piece of software or social media platform, its
value increases without any technical improvement. This is either because the platform
extracts more information as it accumulates more users, or because the utility of the
platform increases for the individual user as the number of users increases. In either case,
the platform’s owner can capture this increased value without being obliged to make any
proportional investment. For the exponents of this position, this constitutes a new form of
rent—in current jargon, “platform rents.”2
There is much to be learned from these interpretations. The first provides a series of
correspondences between our period and the period prior to the rise of the welfare state.
The second tells us that network effects and platform rents are real. But as global
interpretations of the economy, both are unconvincing. The problem with the first
interpretation is that it is hard to square with much of what we know about capitalism since
the fifteenth century. The central claim that capitalism has generally been a low-growth

1/7



[PDF p. 2]
economic system is simply not true. If it were, how could, say, the transition out of the
Malthusian trap, or the First or Second Industrial Revolutions have happened?
The problem with the second interpretation is that it doesn’t account for the competitive
nature of big tech companies. Certainly, platform rents exist, but how durable are they?
Take Microsoft Word, an example of a platform that locks users in simply because so many
others use it. That monopoly has proven vulnerable to competitive pressure from Google
Docs in what seems a textbook example of competition. Furthermore, even if these rents
were very durable, are they really a new economic phenomenon? How different is the rent
collected by Amazon from that which used to be collected by the owners of brick-andmortar shopping malls?3
Fortunately, there is an alternative approach: the thesis of political capitalism. The term
was originally deployed by Max Weber to describe economic activity that is profit-oriented
but relies predominantly on political means rather than on the reaping of productivity gains
from investment.4 A diverse array of scholars now recognizes its usefulness to describe a
range of cases including the contemporary United States and Western Europe, the Islamic
Republic of Iran, and post-communist Eastern Europe.5
The term has been used in quite contrasting ways. For Public Choice neoliberals, it means
something like crony capitalism, bound up with corruption and rent-seeking in a very
general sense.6 On the left, it has almost the opposite meaning, linked as it is to the East
Asian developmental states of China and Vietnam.7 To confuse matters even more, some
scholars8 equate political capitalism with monopoly capitalism.
I use the term to refer to a specific sort of property relationship in which political power
enters the process of value expansion. Historically, capitalism has been characterized as a
circuit: money is used to purchase commodities (particularly means of production, raw
materials, and labor-power), which are then combined in a production process to produce
more commodities. These commodities are then sold to earn more money (M–C–M’). This
is Marx’s general formula for capital, and it continues to operate in the current economy:
money leads to commodities, which lead to more money.
The thesis of political capitalism suggests that a new form of value expansion—a new form
of property—has emerged alongside M–C–M’ and entwined with it. In this new circuit,
money is used to purchase assets and political influence, which, when properly combined
(when an asset purchase is linked with an investment in politics), expand the value of the
asset in question. The asset can then either be sold for a profit or used to make new asset
purchases and new political investments. This new circuit can be described as M–A–M’ (or
in its expanded form, M-(A+P)-M’). Profits derive from capturing a part of the politically
engineered inflated price of assets.

2/7



[PDF p. 3]
There are two immediate objections to this scheme. The first is that political capitalism has
always been around. Firms have always lobbied for government contracts. And
governments, in turn, have always needed to promote investment and create economic
growth to secure political legitimacy. Although it is generally true that capitalism is always
political in the sense that capitalism requires a political system to enforce capitalist
property, politically engineered asset price inflation only emerged in about 1980. Tax cuts—
particularly on capital gains—meant that the value of stock ownership exploded without
any underlying increase in profitability. This initial boost was further enhanced by the ironclad commitment of central banks to maintain high stock valuations come what may. The
basic strategy of asset price inflation was then extended out from stock toward other
holdings, such as real estate.9 Under this new configuration, fiscal and monetary policy
can no longer be conceptualized as policy interventions external to the process of value
expansion. Rather, they are now central mechanisms through which profits are created.
The second objection is that the breakthrough of artificial intelligence has transformed the
situation, and that we are on the cusp of renewed growth in GDP and labor productivity.10
A key piece of evidence would seem to be the recent data-center investment boom. At first
glance, this appears to be irrefutable evidence that the era of what many economists call
secular stagnation is over. In fact, the boom is an expression of the underlying problem: a
massive pool of savings without attractive investment outlets. An initial difference between
the dot-com bubble of the early 2000s and the current AI spending spree is that while the
former was mostly driven by small, highly indebted startups with no plausible business
model, the latter is mostly driven by companies that are highly profitable. However,
because of their massive recent capital expenditures, this investment is now largely being
financed through complexly structured debt and the new technology has yet to show any
profitability.11 While it may be premature to demand returns from AI, investor patience
appears already to be wearing thin. Rather than a self-sustaining cycle of growth, this has
all the characteristics of the latest bubble.
The objections on offer then—that nothing much has changed, and that everything is about
to change—are not particularly compelling. Instead, the rise of the new M–A–M’ circuit of
value expansion explains much of the character of contemporary capitalism: its high level
of inequality, its form of inequality, its low growth rate, and its low rate of investment outside
of the narrowly focused money dump on AI. Importantly, this new form of capitalism is not
the expression of a technological transformation so much as it is the consequence of a
specific political history: a pervasive, direct capture of political power and its deployment to
continually promote asset price inflation.
What does the political landscape of the new capitalism look like? The macro-political facts
are not in much dispute. Despite dizzying inequality of wealth and income, the class
politics that initially created the welfare states of the postwar period are nowhere in
evidence. Various attempts to re-energize social democracy have failed, and the revolt

3/7



[PDF p. 4]
against the political establishment has mostly occurred on the far right. Why? And what is
the connection to the new phase of capitalism?
It is useful first to discuss the general impact of political capitalism on the labor share of
income, and then to analyze more closely the structure of inequality among wage earners
themselves. Putting these two processes together explains why there is such deep
discontent with liberal democracy, and why it is so difficult to organize a social democratic
politics.
The distributional consequences of political capitalism are obvious and brutal. Since 1980,
the labor share of income in the United States has declined by 7% while the profit share
has increased sharply in a context of decreasing investment.12 Initially, this might seem to
be an obvious basis for a left-populist program aimed squarely against the increasingly
parasitic profit-taking group. But such a conclusion would be wrong because it ignores the
extremely uneven distribution of the shrinking wage-income pie.
One important element is a large increase in inter-firm inequality. While it is true that the
economy has always been dominated by a relatively few highly successful firms,13 the way
that this interacts with wage inequality is new. Firms used to employ a combination of
skilled and unskilled labor or credentialed and uncredentialed workers. This is becoming
less common as firms are split between those hiring mostly uncredentialed workers and
those relying exclusively on the credentialed.14 The macro dynamics of increasing income
inequality have thus not led to a broad splitting apart of the population between owners
and non-owners. Rather, the process has fractured the working class.
A group of very profitable firms—largely those that benefit from asset price inflation—has
shared some of its gains with a small, highly educated group, while the mass of lowprofitability firms pays its employees little.15 Therefore, in the context of a generally
declining wage-income share as a proportion of total income, workers with and without a
college degree have had sharply different economic fates. The first group has done
comparatively well, while the relative position of the second has deteriorated.16
Despite the declining share of labor income, politics has not been characterized by a
renewal of class conflict, but rather by a status-group struggle in which those with a college
education or credentials oppose those without. Entwined with this opposition is a conflict
pitting white and native-born workers against people of color and immigrants.17 Why has
politics assumed this form? There are no very good answers to this question. One group of
scholars rather tautologically invokes a “cultural clash,” while another generally ascribes it
to the misconceptions of the left and center-left.
But in the context of political capitalism, the reason our politics is shaped this way
becomes clear. As political authority is ever more oriented to the interests of asset holders,
the space for delivering benefits to the mass of wage earners has declined, while at the
4/7



[PDF p. 5]
same time the space for a relatively small segment of the working class to share in these
enormous gains has expanded. This has led wage earners to pursue different, non-class
strategies to protect their material interests.
Two such strategies have been prevalent. The first, available mostly to the credentialed, is
to try to secure some gains from the firms that have benefited, either directly or indirectly,
from asset price inflation. This group of relatively privileged wage earners has been the
basis of center-left politics, with its privileging of expertise and science. It is drawn
spontaneously to the ideology of meritocracy, which is highly appropriate to its material
circumstances. The second, available mostly to the non-credentialed, has been to turn to
primary identities (race, citizenship status, gender) to defend what can be defended.18 This
group has been the main support of right-wing politics in the current period. This sort of
politics divides wage earners and delegitimizes democratic institutions. It is also deeply
connected to the material realities of capitalism in its current phase.
The political upshot of this analysis is grim. Capitalism has been compatible with
democracy to the degree that a relative separation emerged between the economy and the
state. If the fundamental material interests of capitalists could be guaranteed, they could
tolerate a range of political outcomes. Furthermore, to the extent that capitalism was a
dynamic growth-oriented system, it created a working class with an interest in expanding
rights and a capacity to push for them. This led to a system in which elections had
consequences.
But political capitalism undermines democracy on both sides. From the capitalist side, it
makes control over the state an economically decisive matter, thereby lowering the
tolerance for electoral alternations. From the working-class side, it fragments the working
class into privileged and less privileged groups, which undermines collective interest
formation and social movement capacity. This political configuration tends to be selfreinforcing and deeply corrosive of electoral democracy.
The shotgun marriage between capitalism and democracy is likely to unravel over the
coming decades if the fundamental structure of the political economy is not altered. The
crisis of democracy cannot be ascribed to the strategic and messaging failures of centerleft parties, or to a nebulous cultural transformation. Rather, it is the character of
contemporary capitalism itself that is undermining it. That is a warning to us all.
Dylan Riley is Professor of Sociology at the University of California, Berkeley. He studies
capitalism, socialism, democracy, authoritarianism, and knowledge regimes in comparative
and historical perspective, and is the author or co-author of six books and numerous
articles.

5/7



[PDF p. 6]
1. Thomas Piketty most famously documents three basic phases of inequality: a high
inequality regime prior to the Second World War; a low inequality high growth regime
during the thirties glorious years; and a return to higher levels of inequality and lower
growth since about 1980. See Capital in the Twenty-First Century (Harvard University
Press, 2014), at p. 368, and Capital and Ideology (Harvard University Press, 2020), at
p. 16–20. ↩︎
2. See Cédric Durand, Techno-féodalisme: critique de l’économie numérique (Paris:
Zones, 2020) and Yanis Varoufakis Technofeudalism: what killed capitalism (Brooklyn,
NY: Melville House, 2023). ↩︎
3. For two sharp critiques of the techno-feudalist model see Yvegni Morozov, “Critique of
Techno-Feudal Reason,” New Left Review, 133–134 (2022): 89–126, and “Le
numérique nous ramène-t-il au Moyen Âge?”, Le Monde Diplomatique, No. 857, 72,
August, (2025): 1, 8–9. ↩︎
4. Max Weber, Economy and Society: An Outline of Interpretive Sociology (University of
California Press, 1978), at pp. 965–966 and Richard Holcombe, Political Capitalism:
How Political Power is Made and Maintained (New York: Cambridge University Press,
2018), at p. 41. ↩︎
5. For an initial statement see Dylan Riley and Robert Brenner, “Seven Theses on
American Politics,” New Left Review, 138 (2022): 5–27. A further elaboration of the
model can be found in Dylan Riley “The Rise of Political Capitalism, the Crisis of
Democracy, and the Strategic Tasks of the Left,” in Politics of Liberation:
Conversations with Theory and History, edited by Rosa Vasilaki and George Souvlis
(Athens, Greece: Rosa Luxemburg Stiftung, 2025), 79–103. Dylan Riley and Robert
Brenner, “The Long Downturn and Its Political Results: A Reply to Critics,” New Left
Review (2025), 25–70, responds to a series of objections. Mehrdad Vahabi in
Destructive Coordination, Anfal and Islamic Political Capitalism: A New Reading of
Contemporary Iran (Palgrave, Macmillan, 2022), 117 describes political capitalism as a
form of profit-making based on political appropriation rather than through production.
Péter Mihályi and Iván Szelényi. “The Place of Rent-Seeking and Corruption in
Varieties of Capitalism Models,” in Market Liberalism and Economic Patriotism in the
Capitalist World System, edited by T. Gerőcs and M. Szani (Palgrave, Macmillan,
2019), 67–97 extensively develop the concept of rents as an alternative explanation
for Piketty’s evidence. Venelin I. Ganev in “Postcommunist Political Capitalism: A
Weberian Interpretation,” Comparative Studies in Society and History, 51, 3 (2009),
648–674, develops the idea of political capitalism as a set of de facto political powers
associated with state fragmentation and the violation of formal law. ↩︎
6. Vahabi defines political capitalism as a system in which “profit is extracted from [the]
distribution sphere through appropriative activities,” Destructive Coordination, at p.
117, Randall G. Holcombe in Political Capitalism: How Economic and Political Power
is Made and Maintained (Cambridge University Press, 2018), p. 41, suggests that
political capitalism is a system in which “business profitability depends on connections
and cronyism, businesses have to participate in that system to remain profitable.” ↩︎
6/7



[PDF p. 7]
7. Branko Milanovic in Capitalism Alone (Harvard University Press, 2019), at pp. 96–97,
identifies three features of political capitalism: an efficient bureaucracy, the absence of
the rule of law, and the autonomy of the state. Strangely, then, he doesn’t really
discuss it as a type of capitalism but as a form of state. ↩︎
8. Stephen Maher and Scott Aquanno in “Profitable Immiseration: Finance Capital at the
End of the World,” Socialist Register (2026):1–31, 1–2 mush together political
capitalism with techno-feudalism and condemn both as rebooted “‘monopoly capital’
theory, which holds that capitalism’s inherent tendencies toward concentration and
centralization diminish competition, enabling giant firms to fix prices and rake in
‘super-profits.’” ↩︎
9. Melinda Cooper, Counterrevolution: Extravagance and Austerity in Public Finance
(Zone Books, 2024), at pp. 70–71, well explains the close relationship between tax
policy and asset price explosion in the case of real estate. Thomas Piketty’s Capital in
the Twenty-First Century, at p. 189, documents the historic increase in Tobin’s Q, the
difference between the market value and the book value of firms since 1980. See also
Jonathan Levy, Ages of American Capitalism: A History of the United States (Random
House, 2021), 611–622. ↩︎
10. “Profitable Immiseration” 2 where Maher and Aquanno claim that “Trump did not arise
from capitalist decline, but from a political and social crisis generated by the success
of accumulation.” ↩︎
11. See Jared Bernstein and Ryan Cummings, “Updating Our AI Bubble Call,” Substack,
July 8, 2026. As Fédéric Lordon puts the point, “OpenAI and Anthropic,
haemorrhaging money, have yet to generate a single kopeck of profit.” See “Awaiting
the Crash?,” Sidecar, July 9, 2026. ↩︎
12. For a good explanation of these dynamics see Jan Eeckhout, The Profit Paradox: How
Thriving Firms Threaten the Future of Work (Princeton University Press, 2021), at pp.
10–11 and 76–77. ↩︎
13. Hendrik Bessembinder, “One Hundred Years in the US Stock Markets,” Unpublished
Manuscript, March 21, 2026. ↩︎
14. The Profit Paradox, at pp. 9–10. ↩︎
15. Andrew Yamakura Elrod, “What Was Bidenomics,” Phenomenal World, September,
26, 2024 and Eeckhout The Profit Paradox, at p. 10. ↩︎
16. The Profit Paradox, at p. 8. ↩︎
17. Matt Grossman and David A. Hopkins, Polarized by Degrees: How the Diploma Divide
and the Culture War Transformed American Politics (Cambridge University Press,
2024), at pp. 1–4. ↩︎
18. For an excellent account of this strategy see David Ost, Red Pill Politics: Demystifying
the Far Right From Fascism to Right-Wing Populism (New Press, 2026) especially at
page 14. ↩︎

7/7
