Hegemony, Democracy, and Passive Revolution in Gramsci's Prison Notebooks
Riley; 2011; California Italian Studies
[em:BFUS8WWT]
LLM bundle copy: text only; source original retained unchanged.
Page markers give the printed page where detected and always give the source PDF page.

[PDF p. 1]
eScholarship
California Italian Studies
Title
Hegemony, Democracy, and Passive Revolution in Gramsci's

Prison Notebooks

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/5x48f0mz

Journal
California Italian Studies, 2(2)

Author
Riley, Dylan J.

Publication Date
2011

DOI
10.5070/C322008962

Copyright Information
Copyright 2011 by the author(s). All rights reserved unless otherwise indicated. Contact
the author(s) for any necessary permissions. Learn more at https://escholarship.org/terms
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California



[PDF p. 2]
Hegemony and Democracy in Gramsci’s Prison Notebooks
Dylan Riley
Antonio Gramsci is once again moving to the center of debates in contemporary social
theory. Sociologists have taken up the concepts of hegemony and civil society to analyze
regimes and social movements (Riley 2010; Tugal 2009). Political theorists have used
Gramsci as an inspiration for developing the idea of radical democracy (Laclau and
Mouffe 1985). Scholars of international relations have found Gramsci’s focus on global
processes useful for analyzing neo-liberalism (Morton 2004, 125-127). Gramsci’s work
has also been central in the attempt to elaborate a “sociological Marxism” that moves
beyond both the statist and economistic biases of more traditional forms of Second and
Third International historical materialism (Burawoy 2003; Wright 2010). But despite this
outpouring of recent interest, many of the key elements of Gramsci’s political theory
remain obscure. In this context, this essay returns to the Prison Notebooks1 to ask a
specific question: “How did Gramsci conceive of the connection between democracy and
hegemony?”
This question has already generated a substantial body of scholarship. But most of it
can be placed into one of two positions. One interpretation views hegemony as a theory
of revolutionary dictatorship: a “Leninism” for the West (Galli della Loggia 1977, 69;
Salvadori 1977, 40-41). These writers tend to be highly critical of the various attempts by
the Partito Comunista Italiano (Italian Communist Party, PCI) to use Gramsci as a
symbolic justification for the party’s moderate post-war strategy. As Galli della Loggia
(1977, 29) acerbically noted in the late seventies:
That Antonio Gramsci’s ideological convictions, and the political and
strategic proposals that follow from them can be made consistent with, or
at least adapted to, the schemes of contemporary parliamentary democracy
is an idea that, despite the prodigious theoretical efforts made by the
Communist party in the last twenty years, shows itself to have little
substance as soon as one reads or re-reads the texts with an open mind.
(Translation mine)

1

This essay relies primarily on Selections from the Prison Notebooks of Antonio Gramsci translated by
Quintin Hoare and Geofffrey Nowell Smith (Gramsci 1971). I have used this edition because it is the most
widely used one in social science discussions of Gramsci (for example see Burawoy 1990). However, for
those who would like to locate the discussion in the context of the full Quaderni del carcere I have
included page references to the corresponding passages in the four volume edition edited by Valentino
Gerrantana (Gramsci 2007). In most instances the passages I cite are widely known. The purpose of this
essay is not to emphasize obscure citations from Gramsci’s Quaderni, but rather is to provide a coherent
conceptual framework for understanding the relationship between hegemony and democracy in his work.



[PDF p. 3]
This interpretation of Gramsci places him firmly in the political tradition of the Third
International. The second position, currently and most vigorously expressed by the
director of the Fondazione Istituto Gramsci (Gramsci Foundation Institute), Giuseppe
Vacca, holds that “there is no hegemony without democracy” (1999, 24). This is also the
view of Laclau and Mouffe (1985, 176). Scholars who advocate this interpretation of
Gramsci tend to present his Prison Notebooks as a sharp break with Lenin’s ideas about
the state and revolutionary strategy. According to this position, Gramsci is a theorist of
radical democracy, not a Lenin for the West.
Perry Anderson suggests a useful way of transcending this debate. He points out that
the concept of hegemony was extremely widespread in Russian Marxism (1976-77, 1718). But whereas in this debate it referred to an alliance between workers and peasants in
which workers would play the leading role, Gramsci in the Prison Notebooks “now
employed the concept of hegemony for a differential analysis of the structures of
bourgeois power in the West” (20). This is a crucial point. Although Anderson’s essay
suggestively points to a way of reconciling the two meanings usually associated with
hegemony, his claim that Gramsci’s originality lies primarily in applying the concept to
bourgeois power is too limited.
This paper seeks to develop a new perspective on the debate. It argues that none of
the currently dominant positions adequately grasps Gramsci’s theory of the connection
between hegemony and democracy. While Vacca correctly emphasizes that for Gramsci
any fully hegemonic state must be both liberal and democratic, his interpretation tends to
transform the Sardinian revolutionary into a post-war Italian Eurocommunist, or a
contemporary radical democratic theorist. In contrast, Galli della Loggia and Salvadori
correctly emphasize Gramsci’s revolutionary political strategy, but misinterpret
hegemony as a theory of the dictatorship of the proletariat. Anderson rightly focuses on
the contrasting meanings of hegemony, but his reading of the concept as a theory of
bourgeois class power fails to emphasize that Gramsci embraced hegemony as a political
value. In contrast to all of these interpretations, I argue that Gramsci combined a deep
appreciation for the importance of liberal political institutions, with a Leninist
commitment to social revolution. This surprising combination is, I suggest, what makes
his work so distinctive within the Marxist tradition and accounts for much of his
contemporary relevance.
Specifically, I make two arguments. First, I suggest that hegemony is not just a form
of intellectual and moral leadership in general; it is a form of rational intellectual and
moral leadership. Because of its rational form, hegemony is inconceivable without
pluralism and democracy. Gramsci, unlike what some scholars have suggested about
Marx (Megill 2002, 58), did not conceive of socialism as the supersession of politics, or
more particularly of deliberation. I develop this point by comparing Gramsci’s concept of
hegemony with the Hegelian concept of ethical life. I suggest that two concepts are very
similar, and that a misunderstanding of Hegel lies behind the interpretations of Salvadori
and Gallia della Loggia.
Second, I argue that hegemony is neither “secreted” by civil society, nor is it a
“bottom-up” process of cultural transformation. Typically hegemony is created in a
process of decisive political transformation: revolution. I maintain that Salvadori and
Galli della Loggia correctly grasp this point. Where a new ruling class comes to power in
a non-revolutionary manner, through a process of passive revolution (as in Italy), it is



[PDF p. 4]
extremely difficult to establish hegemony, and therefore democracy. Democratic forms
may emerge, but they will remain weak. To summarize: the whole thrust of Gramsci’s
argument underlines the close connection between decisive revolutionary violence and
functioning democratic systems. The Prison Notebooks, from this perspective, is an
extended theoretical reflection on what historical sociologist Barrington Moore called
“The Contribution of Violence to Gradualism” (1993). To understand Gramsci, then,
requires one to grasp his commitment to democracy and pluralism and his revolutionary
politics in a single intellectual framework.
1. Hegemony as Rationalized Intellectual and Moral Leadership
I begin with the discussion of hegemony as a technique of political rule. Gramsci writes
that, “The methodological criterion on which our own study must be based is that the
supremacy of a social group manifests itself in two ways, as ‘domination’ and as
‘intellectual and moral leadership’” (1971, 57; 2007, 2010-2011). Supremacy then cannot
be understood simply as a consequence of physical force. It also has a moral and
intellectual component. Hegemony is also closely related to a second key concept of
Gramsci’s repertoire: civil society. This refers to “a system of superstructural institutions
that is intermediary between economy and State” (Anderson 1976-77, 35). Civil society
is the locus of hegemony for Gramsci.
This is very familiar terrain. However the real connection between civil society and
hegemony needs to be carefully explicated. I begin this analysis by discussing the
meaning of hegemony and emphasizing its close relationship to the Hegelian concept of
ethical life. Then, I briefly compare Gramsci and Hegel’s concepts of civil society to shed
some light on the extremely close connection between hegemony and liberal democracy.
1.a. Ethical Life and Reason
Hegemony in the Prison Notebooks is a historical concept because the mechanisms of
intellectual and moral leadership differ in different historical periods. More particularly,
hegemony tends to become broader (include more of the population) and more rational as
history progresses (Bellamy and Schechter 1993, 122-123, 125). Neither Galli della
Loggia nor Salvadori adequately grasp this point, and as a result seriously misread the
concept. Galli della Loggia argues, for example, that Gramsci is best understood as a left
wing Silvio Spaventa advocating an authoritarian pedagogy and the propagation of
Marxism as a secular faith capable of supplanting liberalism (1977, 85-87). Indeed he
suggests that Gramsci carries over from Hegel precisely the idea that states must be based
on a highly developed world-view or Weltanschauung. Such an interpretation gets both
Hegel and Gramsci wrong.
Hegel’s approach to the state is distinctive because for him the state is both a set of
institutions and customs and a set of subjects who have a particular attitude or disposition
toward those institutions and customs. This is what the German philosopher means when



[PDF p. 5]
he says that the state has both an “immediate existence” and a “mediate existence in the
self consciousness of the individual” (Hegel 1991, 275).3 In the modern state, this
configuration of dispositions, institutions, and customs takes the form of concrete
freedom.
Modern states combine the two forms of freedom in a particularly intimate way.
Immediate freedom is the ability to pursue one’s own interests. Mediated freedom is
one’s self-awareness of the conditions in which it is possible to pursue one’s own
interests. Hegel demonstrates a connection between these two forms of freedom in the
modern state. Concrete freedom (the combination of immediate and mediated freedom)
requires that “particular interests should reach their full development and gain
recognition of their right” (Hegel 1991, 282). In other words, in the modern state men and
women are not simply free, they are aware that existing political institutions and customs
secure their freedom. Specifically this means that they recognize their individual
freedoms as rights secured by the state.
This recognition of freedom as a right, and the awareness of the political context in
which immediate freedom exists, is for Hegel the key to understanding the strength of the
modern state. Hegel says that particular interests “pass over of their own accord into the
interest of the universal.” This happens when particular interests “knowingly and
willingly acknowledge this universal interest even as their own substantial spirit, and
actively pursue it as their ultimate end” (1991, 282). Free beings are men and women
then who pursue their own interests, but who are aware that these interests require a state
for their pursuit. This is the abstract view. But Hegel also has an argument about how this
develops.
The sections of The Philosophy of Right dealing with civil society argue that the
pursuit of particular interests depends on the existence of an integrated system of needs
(the economy); from the perspective of the individual in civil society this “system of
needs” remains invisible as a system. When, however, the individual achieves an insight
into the conditions that make his own individual freedom possible, and particularly the
integration of needs in a market society, this leads to an understanding of a broader
universal or social system that makes his or her freedom possible. That awareness now
also takes the form of particular duties and rights.
The individual, whose duties give him the status of a subject, finds that, in
fulfilling his duties as a citizen, he gains protection for his person and
property, consideration for his particular welfare, satisfactions of his
substantial essence, and the consciousness and self-awareness of being a
member of the whole. (Hegel 1991, 285)
The modern state distinctively relies on individual subjects being aware of the connection
between their interests as individuals and the interests of the state.
Hegel’s term for this awareness of the connection between individuality and the
universality of the modern state is “duty.” “In the process of fulfilling his duty, the

I use the standard Cambridge edition of the Elements of the Philosophy of Right translated by H.B. Nisbet
(Hegel 1991).



[PDF p. 6]
individual must somehow attain his own interests and satisfaction or settle his own
account, and from his situation within the state, a right must accrue to him whereby the
universal cause [Sache] becomes his own particular cause” (1991, 284-5). Hegel argues
that this gives the modern state its “enormous strength and depth because it allows the
principle of subjectivity to attain fulfillment in the self-sufficient extreme of personal
particularity, while at the same time bringing it back to substantial unity and so
preserving this unity in the principle of subjectivity itself” (282). Consequently, in the
modern state the individual and particular interests of civil society become the basis of
the development of duty.
A key question, from Hegel’s point of view, is how do the individuals of civil society
actually attain an awareness of their universal interests? Hegel’s conclusion is that they
cannot do so in civil society because universality remains constantly hidden behind the
skein of individual interests, as evidenced in his analysis of the system of needs. For
Hegel it is the constitution that leads to this awareness. It does so in part by objectifying
the rights that individuals have in civil society. Moreover the constitution creates
deliberative institutions, such as parliaments, in which public opinion can form. Opinion
plays an absolutely crucial rule in Hegel’s thinking.
Public opinion has been a major force in all ages, and this is particularly
so in our own times, in which the principle of subjective freedom has such
importance and significance. Whatever is to achieve recognition today no
longer achieves it by force, and only to a small extent through habit and
custom, but mainly through insight and reasoned argument. (1991, 353)
The distinctive feature of the modern state, then, for Hegel is that its commands are based
on reason.
The state, suggests Hegel, in a crucial paragraph (§ 270) “knows what it wills, and
knows it in its universality as something thought. Consequently, it acts and functions in
accordance with known ends and recognized principles, and with laws which are laws not
only in themselves but also for the consciousness” (1991, 291). As Hegel proceeds to
explain in the paragraph, this is the fundamental difference between the state and
religion. In religion the subject relates to doctrine in the mode of faith and with feeling.
But Hegel is quite clear that the state does not demand faith. Instead it demands a rational
acceptance of its authority. As Hegel puts the point, “since the state is not a mechanism
but the rational life of self-conscious freedom and the system of the ethical world, the
disposition [of its citizens], and so also [their] consciousness of this disposition in
principles, is an essential moment of the actual state” (297). The modern state is therefore
not based on untransformed custom but rather on reason. In particular, the modern state
does not demand an elaborated Weltanschauung. Instead its cultural strength rests on the
fact a critical rational citizenry with a fully developed sense of its own individual
personality recognizes it as legitimate (Marcuse 1970, 213). Duty in the modern sense is
only possible where there exists a wide scope for individual liberty. This idea of a
political order based on reason anticipates in many respects Habermas’ notion of the
rationalization of the life world. For Habermas (1981, 70), very much like Hegel, sees



[PDF p. 7]
historical development in part as the replacement of traditionally imposed norms with
understanding produced as a consequence of deliberation. The absolutely crucial role of
reason, and particularly of critical rational discourse, in Hegel’s political theory is
important because it means that to the extent that Hegel influenced Gramsci, the
Sardinian could not have interpreted “hegemony” as faith, but rather as reason. Indeed
there is considerable evidence to suggest that this is the case.
1.b. From Hegel to Gramsci
There are many parallels between Gramsci’s idea of hegemony and Hegel’s discussion of
modern ethical life as reason. Indeed it could be argued that the role of the constitutional
state in Hegel is taken over by the “philosophy of praxis,” a term that means Marxism but
also more specifically the self-awareness of men and women’s fundamental capacity to
remake both themselves and society (Gramsci 1971, 323; 2007, 1271-1272). The starting
point for this sort of interpretation is that Marxism can no longer be understood with
Gramsci as either doctrine or custom or ideology. The philosophy of praxis must itself be
grasped as a relationship between a certain sort of subject and a certain sort of political
project. This attempt to grasp Marxism both as a project and as a set of dispositions
toward that project is strictly analogous to Hegel’s conceptualization of the modern state
as containing institutions, customs and subjects.
One of the most effective ways to show this is to investigate the connection between
common sense (spontaneous philosophy embodied in language and un-reflected
concepts) and the philosophy of praxis. A brief word is necessary on the origins of this
latter term and the particular interpretation that Gramsci gives to it. Antonio Labriola
(1972, 412) first coined the term philosophy of praxis to emphasize the importance of
relationships rather than essences in Marxist ontology in a letter written to Georges Sorel
in 1897.4 Giovanni Gentile then elaborated the concept in two critical essays that he
wrote accompanying his translation of the Theses on Feuerbach (Del Noce 1977, 204;
Frosini 2004, 93).5 Gentile’s basic point in these essays is that Marxism, because of its
materialism, had no adequate account of its own function as a social theory in the
historical process. More particularly, Gentile argued, to the extent that Marxism became
politically efficacious it had necessarily to lose “on the way…all its form and
philosophical rigor” (1955, 123). As Sorel (1999, 19-20) understood, it had to be
converted into a myth.
One useful way of reading Gramsci’s notes on the philosophy of praxis is as an
answer to this criticism. For, although Gramsci was extremely sensitive to the importance
of culture in historical development, he saw Gentile’s criticism as elitist and irrational.
For him, the persuasive power of Marxism must above all be based on its ability to
explain the world to ordinary men and women. Gramsci explains how he sees this
4

Labriola refers to the “filosofia della praxis,” whereas Gentile refers to “filosofia della prassi” (Gentile
1955, 72).
The influence of Gentile on Gramsci remains a contentious subject. Frosini forcefully argues that Gramsci
carefully distinguished his philosophy of praxis from Gentile’s. Del Noce’s highly suggestive essay,
“Gentile e Gramsci” makes the opposite argument.



[PDF p. 8]
process unfolding in the notes where he addresses the transformation of common sense
through the philosophy of praxis. As he states in the Prison Notebooks,
At this point, a fundamental theoretical question is raised: can modern
theory [that is the philosophy of praxis or Marxism] be in opposition to the
‘spontaneous’ feelings of the masses? (‘Spontaneous’ in the sense that
they are not the result of any systematic educational activity on the part of
an already conscious leading group, but have been formed through
everyday experience illuminated by ‘common sense,’ i.e. by the traditional
popular conception of the world—what is unimaginatively called
‘instinct,’ although it too is in fact a primitive and elementary historical
acquisition.) It cannot be in opposition to them. Between the two there is a
‘quantitative’ difference of degree, not one of quality. (1971, 199; 2007,
330-331)
This passage raises an important question. Why does Gramsci say that modern theory
(Marxism) cannot be in opposition to the spontaneous feelings of the masses?
Now one kind of obvious objection to this claim would simply be to say that in a
wide variety of historical circumstances the philosophy of praxis does not seem to have
been adopted by “the masses,” however we might choose to define this term. But this sort
of objection misunderstands what Gramsci means by the philosophy of praxis. The
philosophy of praxis is not a set of received and established truths about the way the
social world works. This is why Gramsci claims that it cannot be presented in the form of
a “formally dogmatic, stylistically poised and scientifically balanced exposition”
(Gramsci 1971, 433; 2007, 1424). The philosophy of praxis, or Marxism, for Gramsci is
therefore not a Weltanschauung in the usual sense because it is not a doctrine. It is
instead the progressive achievement on the part of the mass of the population itself of
awareness of its own historical agency. As Gramsci puts it, “the philosophy of praxis, is
precisely the concrete historicization of philosophy and its identification with history”
(1971, 436; 2007, 1426).
From this perspective the whole view that suggests that the philosophy of praxis
might exist against the “spontaneous feelings of the masses” is frankly nonsense. After
all, the philosophy of praxis is only a philosophy of praxis if it in fact is the selfawareness of the mass of the population of its own potential historical role. If it is not the
self-awareness of the mass of the population in this sense, it cannot be a philosophy of
praxis but can only exist as an ideology: a doctrinal system separated from its object of
analysis, which neither transforms its object, nor itself, in the very act of its analysis. In
other words the philosophy of praxis cannot exist in the same way as “biology,” for
example Its validity consists in establishing a critical rational relationship between the
socialist political project and those subjects who might potentially support such a project.
This does not mean that Gramsci is a populist in the sense that he uncritically praises
or celebrates popular culture. His derisive criticism of Henri de Man shows this.



[PDF p. 9]
De Man ‘studies’ popular feelings: he does not feel with them to guide
them, and lead them into a catharsis of modern civilization. His position is
that of the scholarly student of folklore who is permanently afraid that
modernity is going to destroy the object of his study. (1971, 418-19; 2007,
1506)
However, the philosophy of praxis must be translatable into the language of “good
sense;” it must also be a constant critique of “common sense.” As Gramsci writes, “it
must be a criticism of ‘common sense,’ basing itself initially, however, on common sense
in order to demonstrate that ‘everyone’ is a philosopher and that it is not a question of
introducing from scratch a scientific form of thought into everyone’s individual life, but
of renovating and making ‘critical’ an already existing activity” (1971, 331; 2007, 1383).
The philosophy of praxis therefore must be aimed at transforming common sense.
Having stated Gramsci’s basic problem we can now begin to ask, “What is wrong
with common sense?” It is very important to think about this question since it is one of
the central questions of Marxism with which Gramsci grapples. In making this
connection, it is useful to recall what Lenin writes:
The history of all countries shows that the working class, exclusively by
its own effort, is able to develop only trade union consciousness, i.e., the
conviction that it is necessary to combine in unions, fight the employers,
and strive to compel the government to pass necessary labor legislation
etc. (Lenin 1975, 24)
Although Lenin did not give a very satisfactory explanation for why this was the case, it
is worth remembering that his assumption, that the working class could not by its own
efforts achieve a revolutionary consciousness, was widely shared in Bolshevik circles at
the time that Gramsci was writing.
The most sophisticated attempt to explain why this was the case from a rather
orthodox Leninist standpoint was available in the theory of reification developed by
Lukács. The Hungarian philosopher claimed to have solved the twin theoretical problem
of Marxism (failure of revolution in the West and success in the East) by developing
Marx’s theory of commodity fetishism as reification. He argued that the development of
commodity relations and the rationalization of production in advanced capitalist societies
acted as powerful counter-tendencies to the processes of class formation and classconsciousness that Marx famously set out in the Communist Manifesto. Gramsci rejects
this view in important respects, and links the problem of class-consciousness to an
entirely different set of questions.
Gramsci counters Lukács in his very dense note, “The So-Called ‘Reality of the
External World’”



[PDF p. 10]
The popular public does not think that a problem such as whether the
external world exists objectively can even be asked. One just has to
enunciate the problem in these terms to provoke an irresistible and
gargantuan outburst of laughter. The public ‘believes’ that the external
world is objectively real, but it is precisely here that the question arises:
what is the origin of this ‘belief’ and what critical value does it
‘objectively’ have? (Gramsci 1971, 441; 2007, 1411-1412)
Here Gramsci explains the most general problem of common sense as the belief in the
objective reality of the external world. This is what Gramsci calls the “naïve metaphysics
[metafisica ingenua] of common sense” (444; 1415). What is wrong with it? Gramsci’s
point is that the statement “there exists an external world” is an abstract statement
because it does not say from what standpoint this “extra-historical and extra-human
objectivity” could appear (ibid.). Reality from Gramsci’s perspective is neither extrahuman objectivity nor subjectivity. Rather, it is an objectivity that exists in relationship to
a subject for which it is an object.
Common sense, however, denies that reality is a relationship between an object and a
subject for whom, and to whom the object appears as an object. Instead it affirms an
“objectivity that exists even apart from man” (446; 1416). Now this is a common sort of
Hegelian move. Lukács famously describes what he calls reification in a similar way:
The contemplative stance adopted towards a process mechanically
conforming to fixed laws and enacted independently of man’s
consciousness and impervious to human intervention, i.e. a perfectly
closed system, must likewise transform the basic categories of man’s
immediate attitude toward the world. (1971, 89)
Thus for Lukács, as for Gramsci, the belief in the reality of the external world is the result
of a certain sort of subjectivity, a subjectivity that is not aware of itself as the producer of
social reality. However Gramsci interprets this point in a very different way from other
thinkers in the Marxist tradition. For him the source of this view is not commodity
production, but religion. What does religion provide? For Gramsci religion provides the
subject for which objectivity appears as such without any intermediation.
Who is able to put himself in this kind of ‘standpoint of the cosmos in
itself’ and what could such a standpoint mean? It can indeed be
maintained that here we are dealing with a hangover of the concept of
God, precisely in its mystic form of a conception of an unknown God.
(1971, 445; 2007, 1415)



[PDF p. 11]
From Gramsci’s perspective, then, God as the ultimate subject is the guarantor of the
belief in objectivity in-itself outside of a human subject. On this account there is a
subterranean connection between the religious world-view and “positivism” (understood
in a general sense as a stance toward the social world which identifies laws and
institutions that are outside the intervention of human beings). As Gramsci puts the point,
“Catholicism tends, in its competition with idealist philosophy, to appropriate to its side
natural and physical science” (Gramsci 1971, 444; 2007, 1414). Catholicism and
positivism are linked at the level of their basic understanding of reality. I want to
emphasize that this is an extremely original move within the Marxian tradition. It harks
back in some ways to an older critique of Aristotelian thought, which gets its start with
Hobbes, but Gramsci powerfully develops it in the Marxist tradition. Gramsci’s argument
here also anticipates Louis Althusser's concept of ideology as interpellation (1971: 177183), although in a very different idiom.
With respect to Lenin and Lukács and the thinkers of the Frankfurt school, this is
really a new departure. Essentially, this other tradition of Marxism (the Russo-German
one) argued that positivism, which we can take as shorthand for the idea of the objectivity
of the external world, was somehow the immediate and spontaneous form of knowledge
among the “masses.” Gramsci reverses this way of thinking because he instead takes as a
problem to explain “the origin of this belief” (Gramsci 1971, 441; 2007, 1411-1412). One
might think that this turn toward religion indicates Gramsci’s affinity with Feuerbach.
But there is a sharp difference between the two. For Feuerbach the ultimate source of
religious feeling is the human sense of dependence on nature (2004, 2). Gramsci’s
argument remains much more sociological and historical. For religion itself is the product
of a specific social group: the traditional intellectuals. Because they are cut off from class
and from production, traditional intellectuals tend to form “as a crystallized social group”
(Gramsci 1971, 452; 2007, 1406-1407). Further they connect themselves with “preceding
intellectual categor[ies] by means of a common conceptual nomenclature” (Gramsci 452;
1407). To extend Gramsci’s argument, the consolidation of this common conceptual
nomenclature tends to lead to hypostases. One of the best examples of this is idealism.
Gramsci in a dense and elusive note on ‘quality’ and ‘quantity’ appears to suggest that
idealists have tended to attribute concreteness and subjectivity to sets of human
relationships such as the state (469; 1447). For him the conceptual error of idealism is not
fundamentally different from that of vulgar materialism that, instead of divinizing human
collectivities divinizes matter (ibid.). In short, from Gramsci’s perspective the
replacement of the action of things for the action of men and women is an occupational
hazard of traditional intellectuals. In this general sense religion is the spontaneous
ideology of the traditional intellectuals, which they then perpetrate on society as a whole.
To formulate the point as sharply as possible something like reification or false
consciousness indeed does exist for Gramsci, but far from being characteristic of
workers, or even “the masses,” it is the typical ideology of intellectuals.
The limits of the consciousness of traditional intellectuals from Gramsci’s
perspective are most obvious in their inability to establish a consistently immanent
conception of the world. This inability is most radically present in Giovanni Gentile’s
philosophy. Gentile, like Gramsci, is basically concerned with establishing a synthesis of
theory and practice (Harris 1960, 1). Although in some ways Gramsci shares this general
program, he is sharply critical of the speculative form that Gentile gives it.



[PDF p. 12]
It must be demonstrated that while the ‘subjectivist’ conception has had its
usefulness as a criticism of the philosophy of transcendence on the one
hand and the naïve metaphysics of common sense on the other, it can find
its truth and its historicist interpretation only in the concept of the
superstructures. (Gramsci 1971, 444; 2007, 1415)
What does this mean? In my view the key problem for Gramsci with previous attempts to
establish the philosophy of praxis is that the subject was always conceived as an
individual subject. But the subject that can actually create an objective world, an absolute
subject, is not an individual subject (however deified), but a collective subject. As
Gramsci puts the point, “Man knows objectively in so far as knowledge is real for the
whole human race historically unified in a single unitary cultural system…. There exists
therefore a struggle for objectivity...and this struggle is the same as the struggle for the
cultural unification of the human race” (1971, 445; 2007, 1416).
Now this cultural unification can only come about as the result of the elimination of
both class antagonisms and the separation between intellectuals and non-intellectuals. A
theory that fails to do this, that fails to transform common sense, is doomed to take a
manipulative and contemplative view of social reality. This is sociology. From Gramsci’s
point of view sociology as a science (and also vulgar Marxism) is possible only to the
extent that people in fact behave as things. As Gramsci writes “the fact has not been
properly emphasized that statistical laws can be employed in the science and art of
politics only so long as the great masses of the population remain (or are at least reputed
to remain) essentially passive, in relation to the questions which interest historians and
politicians” (1971, 428; 2007, 1429). But the philosophy of praxis cannot be sociology in
this sense because its whole aim and purpose is to eliminate the conditions in which ‘the
great masses of the population’ are passive. Its aim is to establish, to really establish,
precisely that universal subject which is the speculative dream of idealist philosophy.
The above sketch suggests then that hegemony is not just a moral and intellectual
leadership in general, but is a form of self-awareness a type of reason similar to what
Hegel sketches out in the Philosophy of Right. Belief, faith, dogmatism may be
understood as embryonic forms of hegemony, but a fully developed hegemony is a form
of intellectual and moral leadership in which the mass of the population understands its
own interests as being fundamentally compatible with the dominant social group. A fully
developed hegemony cannot be a type of blind faith because it rests on the development
of a critical consciousness in the mass of the population that can develop only in the
context of substantial formal freedom (Vacca 1999, 22-23). Gramsci understands the
institutional context of this formal freedom as civil society.



[PDF p. 13]
1.c. Civil Society in Hegel and Gramsci
Gramsci distinguishes the states of Western Europe from those of the East with reference
to a set of institutions that grow up around the coercive core of the state, which Gramsci
calls, drawing on Hegel, “civil society.” In the famous note where Gramsci makes this
distinction he writes:
In Russia the State was everything, civil society was primordial and
gelatinous; in the West, there was a proper relationship between State and
civil society, and when the State trembled a sturdy structure of civil
society was at once revealed. The State was only an out ditch, behind
which there stood a powerful system of fortresses and earthworks.
(1971, 238; 2007, 866)
Civil society refers to the “‘private’ woof of the state” (259; 56). Hegel, by developing
this concept, argues Gramsci, already anticipated “the parliamentary State with its party
system” (259; 57). Marx, although Gramsci says that he had “a sense for the masses,”
was not able to reach this idea. His “concept of organization remains entangled amid the
following elements: craft organization; Jacobin clubs; secret conspiracies by small
groups; journalistic organization” (ibid.). This is a striking observation. From Gramsci’s
perspective it is Hegel, not Marx, who really has the theory of the modern state.
Why is civil society significant? From the perspective of Salvadori, civil society is
important for Gramsci because it constitutes a strategic obstacle to carrying out a
Bolshevik revolution in Western Europe (Salvadori 1977, 41). There is no doubt that this
is an important part of Gramsci’s thinking. As outlined in the note entitled “Political
Struggle and Military War,”
The same reduction must occur in the art and science of politics, at least in
so far as it concerns the most advanced states where ‘civil society’ has
become a structure that is much more complex and resistant to
catastrophic ‘eruptions’ of the immediate economic element (crises,
depressions and so on); the superstructures of civil society are like the
trench systems of modern war. (Gramsci 1971, 235; 2007, 1615)
But for Gramsci civil society cannot be reduced simply to a strategic obstacle. The
concept also has a programmatic value.
Gramsci suggests that the bourgeoisie is the first class in history able to establish an
“Ethical State”—precisely because it establishes an institutional separation between state
and civil society. From a formal legal point of view, this sort of state treats every person
as if he or she were a “bourgeois.” The historical project of this new form of state is to
create the conditions in which “all mankind will be bourgeois” (1971, 259; 2007, 1050).



[PDF p. 14]
The modern state with a civil society grants men and women specific sorts of rights
insofar as they are human beings. It does not recognize class differences politically. This
distinguishes capitalist ruling classes from all previous ruling classes.
The previous ruling classes were essentially conservative in the sense that
they did not tend to construct an organic passage from the other classes
into their own, i.e. to enlarge their class sphere ‘technically’ and
ideologically: their conception was that of a closed caste. The bourgeois
class poses itself as an organism in continuous movement, capable of
absorbing the entire society, assimilating it to its own cultural and
economic level. The entire function of the state has been transformed; the
State has become an ‘educator,’ etc. (260; 937)
What are the consequences of this observation for revolutionary politics? The basic
lesson that Gramsci draws from this is that an effective socialist politics in the West must
pose for itself the goal of realizing the project of civil society. It is not simply that civil
society is an obstacle to a Bolshevik strategy in the West. The long-term goal for Gramsci
is not to destroy civil society. Rather, civil society defines the content of the
revolutionary project in the West (Vacca 1999, 21).
A class claiming to be capable of assimilating the whole of society, and
which was at the same time really able to express such a process, would
perfect this conception of the State and of law, so as to conceive the end of
the State and of law—rendered useless since they will have exhausted
their function and will have been absorbed by civil society.
(Gramsci 1971, 260; 2007, 937)
For Gramsci, the project of civil society is implicit already in Hegel’s theory of the state
and in all liberal doctrines.
The expressions ‘ethical State’ or ‘civil society’ would thus mean that this
‘image’ of a State without a State was present to the greatest political and
legal thinkers, in so far as they placed themselves on the terrain of pure
science (pure utopia, since based on the premise that all men are really
equal and hence equally rational and moral, i.e. capable of accepting the
law spontaneously, freely, and not through coercion, as imposed by
another class, as something external to consciousness). (263; 764)
Therefore, the socialist project, from Gramsci’s perspective, must be about creating the
conditions under which the social order can be held together through rational consent, not



[PDF p. 15]
through ideology or coercion. Gramsci’s term for this "State without a State" is a
regulated society. The project of realizing civil society is the programmatic content of
“hegemony.’’
The situation in the East was different. Paradoxically the history of the Russian
revolution does not raise any particular problems for Gramsci. The Czarist state was not
an ethical state, but an economic corporate regime based directly on force. This means
that here the socialist project unfolds as a direct seizure of state power, and then the
subsequent use of state power to create civil society “within the husk of political society”
(Gramsci 1971, 268; 2007, 1020). There are dangers in this process, and much of
Gramsci’s writing on Stalinism is devoted to addressing these; but Gramsci’s basic model
here is the French Revolution and its aftermath. Here is the idea. In the 1790s the
bourgeoisie smashes the absolutist state machine. During the Napoleonic period, and then
in the Restoration, the state appears to revert again to an absolutist form, but within the
context of this framework a new civil society is emerging. Gramsci suggests that
Stalinism is basically analogous to the Restoration. The Soviet state is a Thermidorian
regime, and the task of socialism here is to create a socialist civil society both within and
against this regime.
The problem for Gramsci is not Russia, but the West where civil society already to
some extent exists. The bourgeoisie has created the beginnings of an ethical state,
although this ethical state is corroding as the bourgeoisie returns to its economiccorporate form. This means that the politics of socialism must transcend the economic
corporate demands of the working class. The political position of the working class must
be articulated as a project for realizing civil society as regulated society.
Hegemony, then, from Gramsci’s perspective is basically inconceivable outside the
context of a liberal and democratic state. Only a highly developed private sphere can
allow for the sort of critical consciousness necessary for a hegemonic relationship
between the ruling class and the mass of the population. Further, the very project of
revolutionary socialism in the West is best understood as one aimed at realizing civil
society. Vacca is therefore absolutely correct when he writes, “Between hegemony and
democracy there is an intimate link, a nexus of reciprocal implication” (1999, 58). But
what is the origin of hegemony, and what sort of politics does Gramsci’s account of it
motivate? It is to these two questions that I now turn.
2. The Revolutionary Origins of Hegemony
How does hegemony develop? Gramsci’s answer is somewhat complicated and
underdeveloped. It is also worth noting that his main empirical example of the
development of hegemony, the emergence of the Italian state, is an instance of
hegemonic failure. I argue in this section, however, that one of Gramsci’s central
messages is that hegemonies are created during revolutionary experiences in which a
single social class comes to actually embody the interests of society as a whole.
It is particularly important to distinguish between two forms of hegemony. One form
of hegemony refers to intra-class relations, and a second refers to inter-class relations.
When Gramsci speaks of the ruling class of unified Italy he writes:



[PDF p. 16]
The formation of this class involved the gradual but continuous
absorption, achieved by methods which varied in their effectiveness, of the
active elements produced by allied groups—and even of those which came
from antagonistic groups and seemed irreconcilably hostile.
(Gramsci 1971, 58-59; 2007, 2011)
Hegemony, in short, can be exercised in relation to allied groups or hostile groups. For
schematic purposes, it is useful to designate the first sort of hegemony intra-class
hegemony, and the second sort inter-class hegemony. These two dimensions of
hegemony are linked for Gramsci: the structure of internal or intra-class hegemony has
consequences for the ability of a group to pursue external or inter-class hegemony.
In the specific empirical case that Gramsci deals with most fully in the Prison
Notebooks—the Italian Risorgimento—the success of the Moderates in achieving a
hegemonic position within the Italian bourgeoisie, had negative consequences for the
ability of the Italian bourgeoisie as a whole to establish external hegemony, or hegemony
over the non-bourgeois classes. In other words, the specific structure of intra-class
hegemony that characterized the Italian bourgeoisie undermined its capacity to develop
inter-class hegemony.
During the struggles over Italian unification after 1848, different strategies emerged.
Two were particularly important: the proposal to extend the institutions of the
Piedmontese monarchy to the entire peninsula, basically making Italy a larger version of
Piedmont; and the contrasting project of establishing a federal system in which the states
would retain some local control. The first, and more conservative option, was the plan of
the Moderates, while the second, and more democratic, option, was the plan of the Action
Party. Gramsci’s basic historical problem in his “Notes on Italian History” is to try to
understand why the moderate proposal for a Piedmontization of Italy won out over the
Action Party’s proposal for a federal democratic republic.6 But this historical question is
also rooted in a theoretical problem. To understand this it is necessary to revisit
Gramsci’s conception of class.
For Gramsci classes are not groups; they are rather complex social structures with
dominant and subordinate elements, something akin to what the sociologist Pierre
Bourdieu (1985, 725) calls “fields” defined as “an objective space determining
compatibilities and incompatibilities, proximities and differences.” In every class in
formation there is therefore a struggle for leadership of the class. This is one form of
hegemonic struggle, and Gramsci analyzes it with reference to the struggle between the
Moderates and the Action Party in the Italian Risorgimento.
Gramsci links this idea of classes as internally stratified, to a second more
traditionally Marxist notion, that every ruling class has a set of historical tasks that it can
fulfill. In the special case of the bourgeoisie, that set of historical tasks is the
establishment of a unified national state and some kind of representative political system.
If a class fails to achieve its historical potential during its period of ascendancy, this

The Action Party that Gramsci refers to in the Prison Notebooks was a mid to late nineteenth century
formation, different from the post war anti-fascist grouping of the same name.



[PDF p. 17]
bequeaths a set of further obstacles to the succeeding classes. Positioning the issue this
way, the question then becomes why did the Italian bourgeoisie fail to fully establish a
functioning liberal-representative regime in Italy? Why did this particular national
bourgeoisie fail to fulfill its historical task?7
Gramsci answers this question, as I have already suggested, with an analysis of intraclass hegemony. Because the Moderates won out in their struggle with the Party of
Action the transition to a capitalist society in Italy, occurred as a passive revolution.
It was precisely the brilliant solution of these problems which made the
Risorgimento possible, in the form in which it was achieved (and with its
limitations)—as ‘revolution’ without a ‘revolution,’ or as ‘passive
revolution’ to use an expression of Cuoco’s in a slightly different sense
from that which Cuoco intended. (Gramsci 1971, 59; 2007, 2011)
The victory of the Moderates over the Action Party meant that the Italian bourgeoisie
never experienced a heroic period in which it led a popular coalition against feudalism.
Rather the older feudal aristocracy and the rising bourgeoisie formed a rough working
coalition and established some elements of a capitalist society, without carrying out the
basic political tasks of bourgeois democracy. However, this victory came at a price since
it opened up a path of modernization that politically weakened the Italian bourgeoisie in
the long run.
But why, according to Gramsci, did the Moderates win out in their struggle against
the Action Party? Gramsci provides two somewhat different answers to this question.
One refers to Italy’s relatively low level of economic development and the international
circumstances of the unification period (Gramsci 1971, 82-3; 2007, 2032). But this is a
relatively subordinate theme in Gramsci’s argument. For he believes that “subjective
rather than objective reasons” explain the victory of the Moderates (82; 2032). The
reason that the Moderates won out against the Party of Action is that they were the
organic intellectuals of the Piedmontese bourgeois aristocracy, which in turn was the
main social force for national unification. As Gramsci writes, “They were intellectuals
and political organizers, and at the same time company bosses, rich farmers or estate
managers, commercial and industrial entrepreneurs” (60; 2012). They were organic
intellectuals in the sense that they represented “‘specializations’ of partial aspects of the
primitive activity” of the Piedmontese ruling class. Gramsci suggests that this gave them
a strength that the Party of Action lacked. As he puts the point, “the Moderates exercised
7

In speaking of “historical tasks” it is important not to be misled into thinking that classes for Gramsci are
quasi-subjects traversing history and deploying individuals as their unwitting dupes. Rather what Gramsci
means is that a range of structural transformations is compatible with the interests of certain groups.
Interests deriving from property determine the outer limits of this range of transformation. For example,
while the interests of private owners of means of production are compatible with the existence of universal
suffrage and representative institutions, the interests of feudal lords who rely on extra-economic coercion in
surplus extraction are not compatible with such institutions. But interests do not dictate how far along the
possible trajectory of transformation the group will move. This, instead, is the outcome of political
struggles both within classes and between them. One way of thinking about hegemony is as a struggle over
how far along this trajectory a given class or class fraction might move.



[PDF p. 18]
a powerful attraction ‘spontaneously,’ on the whole mass of intellectuals of every degree
who existed in the peninsula, in a ‘diffused,’ ‘molecular’ state, to provide for the
requirements, however rudimentarily satisfied, of education and administration” (ibid.).
In contrast to the moderates, the Action Party was not a group of organic intellectuals
linked to a specific social class. Rather, in the terminology of the note on intellectuals, we
can understand the Action Party as a group of traditional intellectuals, a stratum with few
connections to any decisive historical class. Gramsci describes this group as:
[s]teeped in the traditional rhetoric of Italian literature. It confused the
cultural unity which existed in the peninsula—confined, however, to a
very thin stratum of the population, and polluted by the Vatican’s
cosmopolitanism—with the political and territorial unity of the great
popular masses, who were foreign to that cultural tradition and who, even
supposing the knew of its existence, couldn’t care less about it.
(1971, 63; 2007, 2014)
Being dispersed, and de-linked from any significant social class, this group turned out to
be mobilizable into different class coalitions. The success of the Moderates lay in their
ability to bring these traditional intellectuals, the Action Party, into a coalition in a
subordinate position. The Moderates were able to do this, not only because they were
organic intellectuals, but also because they were able to develop a concrete and realistic
program that was “really progressive” in the sense that it not only satisfied the
“existential requirements” of the Italian social elite, but also caused “the whole society to
move forward” (60; 2012). The hegemony of the Moderates, as is true of hegemony
generally in Gramsci, has a rational and economic core. A class or class fraction is
hegemonic to the extent that it can carry forward a program that is “really” in the interests
of a broad social coalition.
Now I can solve the second problem that Gramsci raises. What is the consequence of
the victory of the moderates within the bourgeois coalition, for the nature of class
relationships after the Risorgimento? The basic thrust of this argument is simple enough.
Precisely because the moderates win out in the struggle against the Party of Action, the
Italian state coalesces after the Risorgimento in a non-hegemonic form.
As Gramsci says of the Italian bourgeoisie, “They aimed at stimulating the
formations of an extensive and energetic ruling class, and they did not succeed at
integrating the people into the framework of the new state” (1971, 90; 2007, 2053-2054).
They did not succeed because the basis of the program on which the Moderates could
present themselves as the hegemonic fraction within the Italian bourgeoisie was
fundamentally incompatible with the interests of the peasantry (61; 2012-2013).
During the political and social crisis of the late nineteenth century this incapacity
emerged again as Italian political elites chose to base themselves on “a capitalist/worker
industrial bloc, without universal suffrage, with tariff barriers, with the preservation of a
highly centralized State (the expression of bourgeois dominations over the peasants,
especially in the South and the Islands), and with a reformist policy on wage and trade
union freedoms” (Gramsci 1995, 29). Therefore, the form in which intra-class hegemony



[PDF p. 19]
emerged in Italy during the unification period meant that the Italian bourgeoisie could
never act as truly revolutionary force, and thus undermined its capacity for inter-class
hegemony.
The contrast to this case of failed Italian hegemony is the successful French case.
Gramsci discusses this in terms of the concept of Jacobinism. From Gramsci’s
perspective the main point about France is that the Jacobins were able to maximize the
magnetic force of the French bourgeoisie. They did so by converting the demands of the
third estate, which were initially the demands of a limited corporate group, into the most
general possible form. Thus, the French Revolution, which began with a set of complaints
on the part of group within the Old Regime, became the demand for a national assembly.
This allowed the French bourgeoisie to form an alliance with the peasantry limited only
by the outer bounds of the class interests of the bourgeoisie; but the merit of the Jacobins
is that they pushed the bourgeoisie to the very limits of its hegemonic capacity (Gramsci
1971, 79; 2007, 2029). Importantly the ability of the French Jacobins to establish this
alliance was based on their revolutionary political program.
3. Hegemony and Democracy
Having sketched both Gramsci’s conception of hegemony and his explanation of it, I now
turn to the issue of democracy. My view is that Gramsci understands democracy as the
form that class rule assumes after the establishment of a fully-fledged hegemony as a
consequence of a revolutionary break with the past. Since such a break is a precondition
for hegemony in Gramsci’s sense, it is also a precondition for a fully functioning
democracy. Gramsci shared with Lenin two important arguments about democracy, and
there is no evidence that he ever wavered from these. First, democracy in capitalist
society was only possible when the forces in contention, and especially the working class,
did not challenge the basic pillars of ruling class power, particularly private property.
From Gramsci’s perspective there is no way to institute socialism (a regime defined by a
fundamental alternation in the property regime) democratically. Second, true democracy
is incompatible with the state, because state power is by definition a violation of the rule
of the people (Lenin 1975, 323). A radical democratization of society remained a goal for
Gramsci, but democracy was an inadequate means to achieve it.
One of the central themes of the Prison Notebooks is the connection between
physical violence or force—as exercised either by states or revolutionary movements—
and consent. Gramsci’s goal is to formulate a theory of their relationship that transcends
the split between the Third and the Second International (between Leninism and Social
Democracy). He argues that the failure to understand this relationship between force and
consent has led in the West to a strategic impasse, and in the East to Stalinist
degeneration.
Gramsci’s starting point is the idea that it is important to match political tactics with
the conditions in which they operate and the goals that they seek to pursue. One of the
most important conditions concerns the specific type of political conjuncture in which
movements operate. Drawing a fundamental distinction between “normal” and
“revolutionary” politics (Adamson 1980, 627-8), Gramsci recognizes that one of the most



[PDF p. 20]
serious political mistakes that a movement or a leadership can make is to apply tactics
appropriate to revolutionary situations to normal situations, and vice versa. How does he
make this distinction?
Gramsci’s terminology for revolutionary situations is “organic crisis.” Organic crises
have two characteristics. First they reveal the class nature of the state, which remains
disguised in periods of normal politics. Second the outcome of an organic crisis depends
on mobilizing social forces outside the core social classes of capitalism: workers and
owners of means of production. (One particularly important group from Gramsci’s
perspective is the rural bourgeoisie.)
During periods of normal politics state power is not at issue. Instead political
struggles are focused on government. They concern who will manage an existing state
machine. Struggles over state management occur through elections and in parliament,
which for Gramsci constitute a “legal terrain” of equilibrium for a system of forces
(1971, 256; 2007, 1744). Politics, in this sense, does not place the basic interests of a
dominant class in question. “When a struggle can be resolved legally, it is certainly not
dangerous; it becomes so precisely when the legal equilibrium is recognized to be
impossible” (256-257; 1744). Although Gramsci does not say too much about elections
per se, another way of thinking about normal politics is what Schumpeter describes as
competitive elitism (1942, 273). Legal struggles unfold between competing teams of
political elites, and do not threaten state power.
Underneath this froth of politics the core of the state for Gramsci is “the
bureaucracy...which exercises coercive power and at a certain point...becomes a caste”
(1971, 246; 2007, 752). During periods of normal politics this bureaucratic core does not
directly engage in political struggle. Normal politics therefore are best understood as
struggles that occur within a given state structure. To put it in a sentence, the formula is
alternating governmental teams and bureaucratic continuity.
The terrain of politics is radically different under conditions of organic crisis. During
an organic crisis “the relative power of the bureaucracy (civil and military), of high
finance, of the Church, and generally of all bodies relatively independent of fluctuations
of public opinion” increase (1971, 210; 2007,1603). These are the moments when the
armed force of the state appears. As Gramsci writes “it is not true that armies are
constitutionally barred from making politics; the army’s duty is precisely to defend the
Constitution—in other words the legal form of the State together with its related
institutions” (212; 1605). Gramsci’s main view is that any transition to socialism will
have to address this coercive core of state power. Normal political means (centrally
electoral struggle) are not appropriate for periods of organic crisis.
This vision of the state underlies Gramsci’s ferocious critique of Social Democracy
and reformism more generally. The error of social democracy is that it sees a legal road
to socialism because it ignores the existence of the coercive core of the state (Salvadori
2007, 96). It thus confuses revolutionary politics with normal politics, and applies
techniques appropriate to normal politics to revolutionary periods.
From Gramsci’s perspective, revolutions must always pass through a period of
organic crises that typically lead to a period of Bonapartism or Caesarism, which
“represents the fusion of an entire social class under a single leadership, which alone is
held to be capable of solving an overriding problem of its existence and of fending off a
mortal danger” (1971, 211; 2007, 1604). This is the aspect of Gramsci’s thought that



[PDF p. 21]
forms the basis of Salvadori’s claim that Gramsci basically see himself as supplementing
Leninism, rather than replacing it with something fundamentally different (Salvadori
1977, 44). To summarize, for Gramsci the nature of politics depends above all on the
presence or absence of an organic crisis. When a ruling class is stably in the saddle,
politics is primarily a matter of consent. During periods of organic crisis when political
movements with contending visions of the state arise, politics becomes more a matter of
force.
4. Conclusion
This paper has developed a reading of Gramsci’s Prison Notebooks that overcomes some
of the problems with both of the dominant formulations of the relationship between
hegemony and democracy. Vacca’s reading of hegemony is very convincing as a
description of Gramsci’s idea of a post-revolutionary society. Hegemony is certainly not,
as Salvadori would have it, the same thing as dictatorship (1977, 45). But Gramsci was
also a revolutionary, not a Eurocommunist or theorist of radical democracy. Although he
did not hold hegemony to be equivalent to dictatorship, he did think that a dictatorship
would be necessary to lay the foundations for a new hegemony and subsequently a new
democracy. The Sardinian is thus a “rare bird.” He was a man who deeply understood
and appreciated the value of democracy and liberalism, yet he never abandoned his
essentially Leninist conception of revolutionary transformation. Indeed for him social
revolution, with its inevitable transitional dictatorship, was the path to the realization of
the utopian dream of a regulated society implicit in all liberal accounts of political order.
This was the basic lesson that Gramsci drew from French Revolution (understood in a
broad temporal sense). The fundamental intellectual and political question that remains is
whether Gramsci’s account of hegemony is compatible with his account of revolutionary
transformation. The only thing that can really be said definitively about this is that history
has not decisively disproved Gramsci’s theory. But to fully explore these issues would
require another essay.
There is also a set of conclusions to be drawn focused specifically on recent Italian
history. The reading of the Prison Notebooks that I have rehearsed above suggests not
only an explanation for fascism, but also an account of the continuing crisis of Italian
democracy. Gramsci suggested that the Italian bourgeoisie in the late nineteenth century
missed the historical opportunity to create a functioning representative democracy. In this
context it became the task of the working class and the peasantry paradoxically to carry
out the bourgeois project of establishing a representative state. How does this thesis look
in the gloomy twilight of the late Berlusconi era? Although ideas of Italy as a particularly
anomalous western democracy are overdrawn since the country has deeply rooted
traditions of local self government and political engagement, it is undeniable that a
functioning alternation of the political elite has never really taken hold on the peninsula
(Ginsborg 2010, 47-54). Indeed today even the tenuous achievements of the first
Republic seem to be rapidly fading. One rather depressing conclusion is possible. Perhaps
Gramsci was correct in his evaluation of the Italian bourgeoisie, but overly sanguine in
his estimate of the political prospects of the Italian working class. While the revolution



[PDF p. 22]
that would complete the Risorgimento is perhaps as pressing as ever, the social agents
that might carry out such a project are difficult to discern. Can the ceti medi (Italian
middle class) provide an adequate substitute for a worker and peasant alliance (Ginsborg
2010, 118-124)? This is one of the burning questions of the coming period in Italian
politics.
Bibliography
Adamson, Walter L. 1980. “Gramsci’s Interpretation of Fascism.” Journal of the History
of Ideas 41: 615-633.
Althusser, Louis. 1971. Lenin and Philosophy and Other Essays. Translated by Ben
Brewster. New York: Monthly Review Press.
Anderson, Perry. 1976-7. “The Antinomies of Antonio Gramsci.” New Left Review 100:
5-78.
Burawoy, Michael. 1990. “Marxism as Science: Historical Challenges and Theoretical
Growth.” American Sociological Review 55 (6): 775-793.
Burawoy, Michael. 2003. “For a Sociological Marxism: The Complementary
Convergence of Antonio Gramsci and Karl Polanyi.” Politics and Society 31: 193261.
Del Noce, Agusto. 1977. “Gentile e Gramsci.” Il Veltro 21: 203-249.
Feuerbach, Ludwig. 2004. The Essence of Religion. New York: Prometheus Books.
Frosini, Fabio. 2004. “Filosofia della prassi.” In Le parole di Gramsci. Per un
lessico dei Quaderni del carcere, 93-111. Rome: Carocci.
Galli della Loggia, Ernesto. 1977. “Le ceneri di Gramsci.” In Egemonia e democrazia.
Gramsci e la questione comunista nel dibattito di Mondoperaio, edited by Federico
Coen, 69-91. Rome: Avanti!.
Gentile, Giovanni. 1955. La filosofia di Marx. Studi critici. Florence: Sansoni.
Ginsborg, Paul. 2010. Salviamo l’Italia. Turin: Einaudi.
Gramsci, Antonio. 1971. Selections from the Prison Notebooks. Translated and edited by
Quintin Hoare and Geoffrey Nowell Smith. New York: International Publishers.
---. 1995. The Southern Question. Translated and introduced by Pasquale Verdicchio.
West Lafayette, IN: Bordighera.
---. 2007. Quaderni del carcere. 4 vols. Edited by Valentino Gerrantana. Turin: Einaudi.
Habermas, Jürgen. 1981. The Theory of Communicative Action. Volume I. Reason and
the Rationalization of Society. Boston: Beacon Press.
Hegel, G.W.F. 1991. Elements of the Philosophy of Right. Edited by Allen B. Wood,
translated by H.B. Nesbitt. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Labriola, Antonio. 1972. Opere. Naples: Fulvio Rossi.
Laclau, Ernesto, and Chantal Mouffe. 1985. Hegemony and Socialist Strategy: Towards a
Radical Democratic Politics. London: Verso.
Lenin, V.I. 1975. The Lenin Anthology. Edited by Robert C. Tucker. New York: Norton.
Lukacs, George. 1971. History and Class Consciousness: Studies in Marxist Dialectics.
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Marcuse, Herbert. 1970. Vernunft und Revolution. Neuwied and Berlin: Hermann



[PDF p. 23]
Luchterhand.
Megill, Allan. 2002. Karl Marx: The Burden of Reason (Why Marx Rejected Politics and
the Market). Lanham, MD: Rowman & Littlefield.
Morton, Adam David. 2004. Unraveling Gramsci: Hegemony and Passive Revolution in
the Global Political Economy. Ann Arbor, MI: Pluto Press.
Riley, Dylan. 2010. The Civic Foundations of Fascism in Europe: Italy, Spain, and
Romania, 1870-1945. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press.
Salvadori, Massimo L. 1977. “Gramsci e il PCI: due concezioni dell’egemonia.”. In
Egemonia e democrazia. Gramsci e la questione comunista nel dibattito di
Mondoperaio, edited by Federico Coen, 33-68. Rome: Edizioni Avanti!
---. 2007. Gramsci e il problema storico della democrazia. Rome: Viella.
Schumpeter, Joseph Alois. 1942. Capitalism, Socialism, and Democracy. New York:
Harper.
Sorel, Georges. 1999. Reflections on Violence. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Tugal, Cihan 2009. Passive Revolution: Absorbing the Islamic Challenge to Capitalism.
Stanford: Stanford University Press.
Vacca, Giuseppe. 1999. Appuntamenti con Gramsci. Introduzione allo studio dei
‘Quaderni del carcere.’ Rome: Carocci.
Wright, Erik Olin. 2010. Envisioning Real Utopias. New York: Verso.
