First Principles
Riley; 2026; NLR/Sidecar
[em:DNWPMR2Y]
LLM bundle copy: text only; source original retained unchanged.
Page markers give the printed page where detected and always give the source PDF page.

[PDF p. 1]
Dylan Riley, First Principles — Sidecar
newleftreview.org/sidecar/posts/first-principles
Dylan Riley

February 11, 2026

First Principles
Dylan Riley
11 February 2026Ideas
A surprising transformation has swept the political culture of the rich world over the past
decade and a half. In the fallout from the financial crisis, the rise of the Tea Party, the
Indignados, the new social democratic lefts, Orban, Brexit, Trump and the surging
popularity of the RN in France, the AfD in Germany and the FdI in Italy all seemed to
suggest that the working class had suddenly re-emerged from its post-1989 slumber to
reject the neoliberal consensus, sometimes from the right, sometimes from the left. But it
was reborn in a paradoxical way. No longer agent of world revolution and social basis for
the reconstruction of society, it now appeared as the defender of the nation state against
global markets and cosmopolitan elites. In short, it would seem that the working class, for
reasons that are at once ‘cultural’ and ‘material’, has been reborn as the great conservative
– in the literal sense – force of the contemporary world.
Accordingly, the left’s theoretical framing of working-class politics has also shifted: no
longer Marx (let alone Lenin or Trotsky) but Polanyi is the theorist of its agency. The
working class acts in ‘countermovements’ to global capitalism. It ‘re-embeds’ and
conserves, defending its ‘fictitious commodity’ from the marketplace. The nostalgic quasiBurkean mood that has overtaken much of the left intelligentsia, whose slogan is perhaps
best encapsulated in the title of Wolfgang Streeck’s most recent book, Taking Back

1/2



[PDF p. 2]
Control?, finds its inspiration in the enigmatic thought of a figure who, while sympathetic to
Stalin, denounced the early Bolsheviks, and Trotsky in particular, as unrealistic dreamers.
The left in this situation faces a grave dilemma. It can either follow the working class along
the nationalist-chauvinist road or insist on its internationalist principles at the cost of
severing any remaining connection with its indispensable social agent. The morbid signs of
this problem are everywhere. Social democrats toughen up border enforcement and
embrace right-wing talking points against the scourge of wokeism. On the opposite side of
the spectrum, elements of the right increasingly employ a marxoid language and mode of
analysis, the target a deadening technocracy in control of a deep state that must be
smashed to revivify the nation.
This is a struggle that the right will always win because it can speak in forthrightly nativistic
terms on immigration and is unconstrained by any residual commitments to redressing
past historical injustices in its critique of political correctness. The left’s attempt to shift in a
chauvinist direction, meanwhile, has produced only a weak and unclear version of the
original. Paradigmatically, who would want to support the Bündnis Sarah Wagenknecht
when the Alternative für Deutschland is on offer?
Is there a way out of this trap, or have the historical tides shifted so profoundly that left
politics is stranded gasping on the shore: a fish out of water? A starting point might be a
conceptual purification: a return to first principles. For much of the discourse about class
has been ‘culturalized’; it counterposes an educated elite to a working class defined as
those without a degree. But of course the possession of an education does not exempt one
from the imperative of wage labour. This might at least help to pose the problem, which is
not so much that workers as a whole are turning to the right as that the class is
fundamentally fractured by the material interests deriving from the market position of its
component parts as Weber noted long ago. Framed in this way, the necessary strategy
would seem to be not to accommodate the rightward drift to little avail, but to find a basis
on which to suture that divide, one that speaks both to highly specific, culturally inflected
market interests as well as class-wide interests rooted in the common experience of wage
labour.
This politics must start from the observation that the economic interests of wage earners
under capitalism are highly differentiated and can point in different, even contradictory
political directions. Class interests and economic interests are by no means identical. It is
not a matter of appealing to ‘economic’ interests over ‘social’ or ‘cultural’ interests
(misleadingly termed ‘identity’ politics). Rather, it is a matter of developing a materialist
politics that is at once specific and general, and which addresses workers’ lives in the
experientially accessible realm of market relations, and their potential in the experientially
distant structure of ownership.
Read on: Eric Hobsbawm, ‘Farewell to the Classic Labour Movement?’, NLR I/173.

2/2
